0   The Infernal Comedy
John Malkovich makes his UMS debut portraying a dead serial killer who returns to the stage to present his autobiography in a public reading. Malkovich appears as part of a theatrical opera of sorts that features a 40-piece chamber orchestra and two sopranos telling the real-life story of Jack Unterweger, a convicted murderer and acclaimed prison poet. Pardoned by the Austrian president Kurt Waldheim in 1990 at the behest of the Viennese literati, Unterweger’s public “rehabilitation” was anything but — within two years, he had been arrested and convicted for the brutal murder of 11 prostitutes in three countries. This gripping performance uses arias and music by Gluck, Vivaldi, Mozart, Beethoven, Boccherini, and Haydn as the counterpoint to Malkovich’s chilling monologue, which shifts between reality and delusion.

1   Yuja Wang, piano
Chinese pianist Yuja Wang combines the spontaneity and fearless imagination of youth with the discipline and precision of a mature artist. Regularly lauded for her controlled and prodigious technique, her command of the piano has been described as "astounding" and "superhuman." Born in Beijing in 1987, Yuja began studying piano at age six, with her earliest public performances taking place in China, Australia, and Germany. She went on to study at the Central Conservatory of Music in Beijing under Ling Yuan and Zhou Guangren. She has been praised for her authority over the most complex technical demands of the repertoire, the depth of her musical insight, her fresh interpretations, and her graceful, charismatic stage presence.

2   London Philharmonic
The London Philharmonic returns for its first appearance since November 2006, this time under the direction of the exciting young conductor Vladimir Jurowski, who became the orchestra’s principal conductor in 2007, succeeding Kurt Masur. Jurowski conducts Tchaikovsky’s Manfred Symphony, the only one of Tchaikovsky’s symphonies that is not numbered. Based on a poem by Lord Byron, the Manfred Symphony is rarely performed in the concert hall. Janine Jansen, a 23-year-old violinist who has been a huge star in her native Holland ever since her Concertgebouw debut at the age of 10, makes her UMS debut.

3   Hamburg Symphony
In 1971, French composer Olivier Messiaen was commissioned by Alice Tully, the New York philanthropist most widely known for her contribution to Lincoln Center, to write a piece commemorating America’s Bicentennial. Messiaen was inspired and fascinated by the natural wonder he found in the landscapes of the American West.Des canyons aux étoiles (From the Canyons to the Stars) represents his sonic impressions of America’s last untouched frontier. Conductor Jeffrey Tate and the Hamburg Symphony Orchestra, in collaboration with Israeli filmmaker Daniel Landau, bring the piece alive in a new cinematic installation, where images of man’s impact on the environment create a counterpoint to sounds of untouched nature. Through film images projected on multiple screens, Hill Auditorium will be turned into a multi-sensory experience celebrating the beauty of the earth and our unaltered landscapes.

4   Chicago Symphony Orc
Wind players of the Chicago Symphony come together for this special concert that features two of Mozart’s compositions for wind ensemble. In addition to writing large-scale music, Mozart produced lighter music for special occasions, including the two well-known serenades on this program. The Serenade in c minor is a wind octet, scored for pairs of oboes, clarinets, horns, and bassoons; the “Gran Partita” is scored for 12 wind instruments, including the seldom-heard basset horn, plus string bass. Members of the Chicago Symphony join together with other musicians to perform these delightful works.

5   San Francisco Sympho
Michael Tilson Thomas and the San Francisco Symphony return with their specialty: Mahler. MTT has been associated with the San Francisco Symphony since his first guest conducting appearance in 1974, and their Mahler Project, a 17-disc set recorded over an eight-year period of all of the composer’s symphonies and works for voice with orchestra, has won seven Grammy awards. 
This appearance by the San Francisco Symphony celebrates the 70th birthday of music director Michael Tilson Thomas with one of his signature specialties: Mahler’s Symphony No. 7, a work that shows Mahler at his most mysterious, with a tantalizing nocturnal quality.
Please note: There will be no late seating for this program.

6   Pavel Haas Quartet
“The world’s most exciting string quartet? Well, they suit the tagline better than most. Their tone is large, quasi-orchestral. They take risks. Above all, they play with passion.” (The Times,, London) Based in Prague, the Pavel Haas Quartet is named for Czech composer Pavel Haas, who was imprisoned at Theresienstadt and died at Auschwitz in 1944. While the Quartet is passionately committed to the Czech repertoire, and particularly the three wonderful string quartets that Haas composed (including the one on this program, scored for string quartet and percussion), all their performances receive extraordinary acclaim. “In a class of their own…” (The Strad)

7   Ballet Preljocaj
Few audience members in attendance at Ballet Preljocaj’s 2012 performances of Snow White will forget the company’s astonishing creativity and extraordinary dancing. And Then, One Thousand Years of Peace, which will be seen only at UMS and at BAM, was first created by Angelin Preljocaj for the Bolshoi Ballet in 2010 and takes inspiration from the vision of apocalypse conjured by St. John in the biblical Book of Revelation. It is, he says, about the lifting (“apo”) of the veil (“calypsis”) of things in our world that are hidden from view, rather than a depiction of biblical or global catastrophe. Set to a pulsating soundtrack, the piece combines intricate, edgy action with slow, graceful movement in an ever-evolving dance that reveals our innermost hopes, desires, and fears. “A huge, ambitious monolith of a work.” (The Guardian)
It’s been more than a decade since Ballet Preljocaj (pronounced prezh-oh-kahzh) made its UMS debut, but this production of Snow White, created in 2008, will be well worth the wait. Angelin Preljocaj has created a work for all 26 dancers of his company, setting the Grimm brothers’ version of the fairytale to the most beautiful scores of Gustav Mahler’s symphonies for this contemporary ballet. With costumes designed by Jean Paul Gaultier, this production of Snow White is sure to shake up those who have grown up with only the Disney version at their disposal. “I was very keen to tell a story, offer something magical and enchanted,” says Preljocaj. At the same time, he approaches Snow White’s stepmother, the Queen, as the centerpiece of the story, representing the conflict of her own longing to be desirable and seductive while watching her daughter grow up.

8   Joshua Bell
Often referred to as a “poet of the violin,” Joshua Bell enchants audiences with his breathtaking virtuosity, sheer beauty, and charismatic stage presence. His restless curiosity, passion, universal appeal, and multi-faceted musical interests have been developed from age four, when his parents noticed him plucking tunes with rubber bands that he had stretched around the handles of his dresser drawers. His first US tour as music director of the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields, which included the 2012 Ford Honors Program in Ann Arbor, resulted in rock concert enthusiasm from audiences. He returns now to perform a Valentine’s weekend recital. 
Sir Neville Marriner says that the small ensemble he founded in 1958 “had no intention of giving any concerts or continuing forever.” Happily, whatever the initial intention, the Academy is firmly established more than 50 years later as one of the world’s leading chamber orchestras. Formed from a group of leading London musicians and working without a conductor, the Academy gave its first performance in its namesake church in November 1959. For their first UMS appearance in 11 years, the Academy brings their highly lauded sound to an exquisite all-Beethoven program. Superstar violinist Joshua Bell attacks the stunning Beethoven Concerto with his breathtaking virtuosity and sumptuous tone and leads the rest of the program from the concertmaster’s chair.

9   Murray Perahia
In the more than 35 years he has been performing on the concert stage, Murray Perahia has become one of the most cherished pianists of our time.
Anyone who has heard one of Murray Perahia’s previous 11 UMS appearances would have to agree with the assessment of The Los Angeles Times: “Perahia is a marvel.” The Seattle Times notes, “Perahia may be the closest thing to a pure conduit of music — one in which the imagination and skill of the player are entirely at the service of the composer, not the player’s ego…The soul of a poet, the mind of a thinker, the hands of a virtuoso: No wonder audiences love this guy.”

10  Mariinsky Orchestra
The Mariinsky Orchestra and Valery Gergiev return for two performances of Russian orchestral masterpieces. Siberian pianist Denis Matsuev returns to Ann Arbor to join the orchestra for this performance. At this performance, Valery Gergiev and the Mariinsky Orchestra will also receive the 2015 UMS Distinguished Artist Award.

11  Detroit Symphony Orc
A concert created to showcase Hill Auditorium’s organ, which was built in Detroit in 1893.
UMS and the Detroit Symphony Orchestra have partnered together for years, bringing many moving performances to UMS audiences. This latest partnership seeks to celebrate the 100th birthday of Hill Auditorium with a concert that features the Frieze Memorial Organ. The organ was built in Detroit in 1893 and displayed at the Chicago World’s Fair: Columbian Exposition, which celebrated the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s arrival in the New World. Shortly thereafter, the University purchased the organ, and it was a centerpiece of Albert Kahn’s design when Hill Auditorium was built.

12  New York Philharmoni
The New York Philharmonic performs three different concerts in Hill Auditorium during the U-M Homecoming Weekend as part of an extended five-year partnership. The programs will be drawn from the New York Philharmonic’s first two weeks of 2015-16 subscription concerts, as well as their opening night gala at Carnegie Hall.
The orchestra’s residency, which includes numerous educational and community engagement activities, closes with an unprecedented performance of Leonard Bernstein’s live score to the 1954 classic, On the Waterfront. The magnificent soundtrack for On the Waterfront was Leonard Bernstein’s only original movie score. The music churns with dramatic intensity, underscoring the brutality of the docks, the tough combativeness of the longshoremen, and the dark, looming presence of the mob bosses who dominate their territory. Written by Budd Schulberg and directed by Elia Kazan, the story is based on true events about crime and corruption on the waterfronts of Manhattan and Brooklyn, with Bernstein’s music accentuating the somber, yet triumphant, conclusion. Academy Award-nominated film composer and conductor David Newman leads the New York Philharmonic in this final concert of their 2015 residency.
Complete film screening with a live performance of the acclaimed score, the only movie score composed by Leonard Bernstein. The 1954 Elia Kazan film starring Marlon Brando won eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor, and Best Director.

13  Artemis Quartet
“Their performances overflow with fullness of sound, delineated structure, and unparalleled drama.” (Frankfurt) The Artemis Quartet made its UMS debut in 2013 with an interesting pairing of Bach and Piazzolla. Now the ensemble returns with a more conventional string quartet program that features works by Dvorák, Latvian composer Peteris Vasks, and Tchaikovsky. The Berlin-based ensemble was founded in 1989 and programs its own series at the Berlin Philharmonic. In 2011, it was named Quartet in Residence at the Vienna Konzerthaus.

14  Anne-Sophie Mutter, 
With unparalleled distinction in the world of classical music, Anne-Sophie Mutter returns to UMS for her sixth appearance since her 1989 UMS May Festival debut with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra. With an international career that began at age 13, when Herbert von Karajan invited her to perform with the Berlin Philharmonic, she also devotes time to numerous charity projects and supports the development of young, exceptionally talented musicians. Accompanied by her longtime recital partner, Lambert Orkis, she offers a performance that gives proof to her reputation as one of very best violin virtuosos in the world.

15  Bobby McFerrin
Matchless vocal improviser with a breathtaking vocal range, Bobby McFerrin returns with his latest project influenced by the spirituals his father sang. Expect soulfulness, poignancy, beauty, and joy.
Listening to Bobby McFerrin sing may be hazardous to your preconceptions; side effects may include unparalleled joy and a sudden, irreversible urge to lead a more spontaneous existence. Ten-time Grammy Award winner Bobby McFerrin will always be the guy who sang “Don’t Worry, Be Happy,” but his “greatest gift to audiences may be transforming a concert hall into a playground, a village center, a joyous space” (The Los Angeles Times). What Bobby McFerrin does is not an act; it’s spontaneous invention. Bobby’s legendary solo vocal performances have dazzled audiences all over the world and sent them home singing. With his new project, SpiritYouAll, Bobby pays homage to his father (the opera singer Robert McFerrin, Sr) and the generations of Americans who sang of our shared joy and pain through the songs commonly known as the Negro Spirituals.

16  Alison Balsom
Experience one of the most distinctive and groundbreaking musicians on the international circuit today.
Firmly established as one of the world’s leading trumpeters, Alison Balsom makes her UMS debut with an evening of shockingly beautiful music. Born in 1978, Balsom was recently named “Female Arts of the Year” at the Classical BRITs for the second time, and in 2009 she headlined one of classical music’s most celebrated concerts – the last night of the BBC Proms, which reached its biggest ever global TV audience of an estimated 200 million.

17  SITI: Trojan Women
SITI is committed to providing a place where the interaction of art, artists, audiences, and ideas inspire the possibility for change, optimism, and hope.
SITI Company, one of the country’s leading theater ensembles, brings one of the greatest of all anti-way dramas in this new production directed by Anne Bogart and adapted by Jocelyn Clarke. In the ruins of their burning city, the royal women of Troy—still mourning the slaughter of their husbands and sons—await enslavement and exile. The play is a timeless meditation on the moments of individual choice that separate death and life, despair and hope, future and past.
The Trojan Women is an ancient tragedy by the Greek playwright Euripides. It was first performed over 2,400 years ago during the Peloponesian War and is often considered a commentary on the barbaric behavior of the Athenians toward the women and children of the people they subjugated in war. It’s believed to be based on capture of the Aegean island of Melos and the subsequent slaughter and subjugation of its populace by the Athenians in 415 BCE, the same year in which the play was written.

18  Audra McDonald
Audra McDonald has secured her place atop Broadway’s pantheon with a record-breaking six Tony Awards, the only actor ever to achieve the Tony Grand Slam: “Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play” (as Billie Holiday in Lady Day at Emerson’s Bar and Grill), “Best Featured Actress in a Musical” (Carousel and Ragtime), “Best Featured Actress in a Play” (Master Class and A Raisin in the Sun), and “Best Actress in a Musical” (The Gershwins’ Porgy and Bess). Blessed with a luminous soprano and an incomparable gift for storytelling, she is equally at home on Broadway and opera stages and in roles on film and television. After her stunning 2013 Gershwin concert, she returns to UMS for her sixth appearance, featuring music from her most recent recording, Go Back Home. “One of Ms. McDonald’s greatest gifts is to find the story inside the song and deliver it with immediacy and clarity…A defining voice of our time.” (New York Times)

19  Andras Schiff, piano
After his stunning performance of Bach’s Goldberg Variations and Beethoven’s Diabelli Variations two seasons ago, Sir András Schiff returns with a project called “The Last Sonatas.”
Performed over the course of a week, this mini-festival includes the final three sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and Schubert.

20  Apollo's Fire
Fresh from their 2014 performance of Monteverdi’s Vespers, Apollo’s Fire & Singers returns to St. Francis of Assisi Church with one of their signature pieces, Bach’s St. John Passion. Bursting out of the gate from the agitated opening chorus, this work is considered Bach’s most dramatic and theatrical oratorio. In this acclaimed interpretation, the story’s action is highlighted by a dramatic approach: the roles are performed by true singing actors, staged on a special theatrical platform within the orchestra. The acclaimed Apollo’s Singers evoke the wild mob with fierce intensity.

21  Joshua Bell, violin
Often referred to as a “poet of the violin,” Joshua Bell enchants audiences with his breathtaking virtuosity, sheer beauty, and charismatic stage presence. His restless curiosity, passion, universal appeal, and multi-faceted musical interests have been developed from age four, when his parents noticed him plucking tunes with rubber bands that he had stretched around the handles of his dresser drawers. His first US tour as music director of the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields, which included the 2012 Ford Honors Program in Ann Arbor, resulted in rock concert enthusiasm from audiences. He returns now to perform a Valentine’s weekend recital.

22  St Petersburg Philha
The St. Petersburg Philharmonic returns to Ann Arbor, bringing along the young pianist Denis Kozhukhin, who makes his UMS debut. Kozhukhin’s “nimble, flying virtuosity is a mix of weightless, supple, acrobatic display and power with a steel core…spectacularly mind-boggling.” (The Herald Scotland) The program also features the Georgian composer Giya Kancheli’s …al niente, which was dedicated to Yuri Temirkanov.

23  Israel Philharmonic
The Israel Philharmonic, along with their “Music Director for Life”, Zubin Mehta, returns to Ann Arbor for the first time in a decade. Founded in 1936 by Bronislaw Huberman, the IPO’s inaugural concert was conducted by Arturo Toscanini. For more than 75 years, the orchestra has hosted the world’s greatest conductors and soloists while developing Israeli artists and young talents from both Israel and abroad. Born in Bombay, Zubin Mehta has had a longstanding affiliation with the orchestra dating back more than 40 years. He has also served as music director of the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the New York Philharmonic, and counts among his many accolades a star on Hollywood Boulevard.

24  Akademie fur Alte Mu
The Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin began as a courageous display of musical sovereignty against the East German socialist regime and now, some 30 years later, enjoys recognition as one of Europe’s greatest musical success stories. “Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin is early music’s Bang on a Can All Stars…staggeringly good players.” (Los Angeles Times) Their UMS debut program features music by J.S. Bach and two of his sons.

25  Olga Kern, piano
Olga Kern was the 2001 Van Cliburn winner and will perform a program of Schumann, Chopin, and Rachmaninoff. We are delighted to be able to bring Ms. Kern to Ann Arbor. Ms Kern is giving two sold-out concerts to inaugurate the Van Cliburn Foundation’s new concert hall this week in Fort Worth. She will also perform in recital at New York’s 92nd Street Y in early February.

26  Kremerata Baltica
Born in Latvia, violinist Gidon Kremer has had an unconventional career, beginning studies with violin master David Oistrakh at the age of 18 and going on to win first prize in both the Paganini and Tchaikovsky International Competitions. With an unusually extensive repertoire, he regularly champions the work of living composers and has performed many important new compositions. He returns to UMS with his chamber ensemble Kremerata Baltica to perform a program that commemorates, in part, the centennial of Benjamin Britten’s birth.

27  Tara Erraught, mezzo
Her career was launched with an unexpected debut, replacing an ailing colleague and scoring great acclaim as Romeo in Bellini’s I Capuleti e i Montecchi at Bavarian State Opera. The rest is history. Just a few months ago, 26-year-old Tara Erraught’s Vienna State Opera debut left critics positively elated and audiences stunned. UMS brings this Irish-born mezzo-soprano to Hill Auditorium for her area debut, which will include works by Brahms, Dvorák, Fauré, R. Strauss, and Rossini.

28  Denis Matsuev, piano
Anyone who attended last season’s concert by the Mariinsky Orchestra came away talking about one thing: the astonishing piano soloist Denis Matsuev, whose extraordinary performance of Rachmaninoff’s Third Piano Concerto had the audience buzzing in the lobby at intermission, immediately after the performance, and for weeks beyond the concert hall. UMS immediately pursued a date for a solo recital and is pleased to deliver what is sure to be one of the most talked-about events of the season. “[The] Russian pianist Denis Matsuev brought …legendary Herculean strength and terrifying technique that Rachmaninoff and his famous octave-and-a-half hand span was said to have embodied. Matsuev was up to the task. Not only did he throw down thunderous octaves and navigate flurries of notes and trills, he had the endurance to consider the greater picture of the work at all times…It was a performance of formidable dexterity and structural clarity.” (Pittsburgh)

29  Handel's Radamisto
A concert opera featuring Handel’s Radamisto with countertenor David Daniels in the title role.
For his first opera at the Royal Academy, Handel chose an imposing subject: desire, dictatorship, and personal infatuation at the court of the Armenian King Tiridate. After its first airing in London in 1720, Radamisto was described by a critic as “more solid, ingenious, and full of fire than any drama which Handel had yet produced in this country.” But there’s intense subtlety and humanity in Radamisto, too, in the delicate poise of its very personal and artful arias and ensembles. Baroque aficionado Harry Bicket assembles an all-star cast to join the musicians of the English Concert for this rare performance of Handel’s exquisite opera.
In UMS’s early history, the concert opera was a standard feature on many UMS seasons. We’re delighted to present this concert version of Radamisto featuring U-M alumnus David Daniels, who has led the resurgence of interest in countertenors over the past two decades. “To say he is the most acclaimed countertenor of the day, perhaps the best ever, is to understate his achievement. He is simply a great singer.” (The New York Times)

30  Milhaud's Oresteian
When Hill Auditorium was first built, UMS was the organization that oversaw the School of Music, a situation that held true until the early 1940s, when UMS transferred oversight of the School of Music to the University of Michigan. To commemorate 100 years of collaboration, we celebrate with a massive orchestral and choral work, Darius Milhaud’s Oresteian Trilogy, set for vocal soloists, chorus, orchestra, and a battery of percussion instruments. Based on the plays by Aeschylus and the only trilogy in Greek drama that has survived from antiquity, it relates the bloody chain of murder and revenge within the royal family of Argos. The work has rarely been performed in its entirety and, as with William Bolcom’s Songs of Innocence and of Experience in 2004, will be recorded for international release. The concert and recording feature ensembles from the University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre & Dance alongside the UMS Choral Union and a cast of soloists, all conducted by U-M’s Kenneth Kiesler.

31  Random Dance
“If any artist has defined the decade, it’s Wayne McGregor.” (The Times, London) Random Dance was founded in 1992 and became the instrument upon which McGregor evolved his drastically fast and articulate choreographic style. The company became a byword for its radical approach to new technology, incorporating animation, digital film, 3-D architecture, electronic sound, and virtual dancers into the live choreography. McGregor, an award-winning British dancemaker who serves as resident choreographer of The Royal Ballet, Covent Garden, is renowned for his physically taxing movement style and ground-breaking collaborations across dance, film, music, visual art, and science. Specifically, he researches the relationship between dance and the mind as artist-in-residence at the Department of Experimental Psychology at the University of Cambridge. Wayne McGregor is “doing some of the most exciting work in ballet on the planet.” (The New York Times)

32  Hagen Quartet
“Their performance was filled with subtlety and wonder…the playing was breathtaking in its precision, dynamism, and agility…a thrilling encounter.” (The Independent) Regarded internationally as one of the foremost string quartets of the day, the Hagen Quartet consists of the two brothers Lukas (violin) and Clemens (cello) and their sister Veronika Hagen (viola), along with violinist Rainer Schmidt, who has been with the group for more than 20 years. For this return performance — they last appeared in Ann Arbor in 1998 — the Hagen Quartet presents a program of Beethoven quartets as part of UMS’s focus on musical renegades.

33  Handel's Messiah
The holiday season in Ann Arbor is never officially underway until Handel’s Messiah is performed at Hill Auditorium. An Ann Arbor tradition, these performances are ultimately the heart and soul of UMS, connecting audiences not only with the talented people on stage but also with friends and family who attend each year. In a true community tradition, the performance features the Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra, the 175 voices of the Grammy Award-winning UMS Choral Union (2006 Best Choral Performance), and conductor Jerry Blackstone.

34  Propeller: Twelfth N
Propeller returns after its much talked-about 2011 performances of Richard III and The Comedy of Errors with new productions of Twelfth Night and The Taming of the Shrew, two comedies full of mistaken identities, transformations, and deceptions that ultimately reveal truth.
In The Taming of the Shrew, a man playing a boy dresses up as a girl, which confuses Christopher Sly. In Twelfth Night, a man plays a girl disguised as a boy, which confuses everybody.
Both plays explore beautifully how being in love with the wrong person can reveal true feeling.
Propeller uses an all-male cast as was done in Shakespeare’s day. Mixing a rigorous approach to the text with a modern physical aesthetic, the company updates the productions in surprising ways, with actors also performing live music.
“As directed by Edward Hall, Propeller specializes in knuckle-duster Shakespeare that digs for the harshness beneath the lyricism. Funny, antic, bawdy: the productions are all these expected things. But they also make sure that the chuckles stick in your throat. The poetry may still be pretty; the comedy definitely is not.” (The New York Times)

35  St Lawrence Quartet
One of the great finds of the 09/10 season was the St. Lawrence String Quartet, which made its UMS debut in a stellar program of Haydn, Ravel, and John Adams. Haydn returns to the program for this appearance, which is bookended with the composer’s quartets. In between, the ensemble performs a new work by Osvaldo Golijov, the Argentinean composer who has worked with the SLSQ since the early 1990s. The SLSQ appears twice with UMS in the 11/12 season; they also perform a new work by John Adams with the San Francisco Symphony in March as part of the American Mavericks concerts.

36  Belcea Quartet
Founded at the Royal College of Music in London 20 years ago, the Belcea Quartet is based in Great Britain but comprised of diverse cultural backgrounds (French, Romanian, Polish) that contribute to their dynamic and free interpretive style. Their diverse influences are reflected in repertoire that pairs contemporary works with the Quartet’s profound connection to the great repertoire of the Classical and Romantic periods.

37  NT - The Audience
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. Helen Mirren reprises her Academy Award winning role as Queen Elizabeth II in the highly-anticipated West End production of The Audience. For sixty years Elizabeth II has met each of her twelve Prime Ministers in a private weekly audience at Buckingham Palace. Both parties have an unspoken agreement never to repeat what is said. The Audience imagines a series of pivotal meetings, from Churchill to Cameron, each Prime Minister using the conversations as a sounding board and a confessional – sometimes intimate, sometimes explosive. And, from young mother to grandmother, these private audiences chart the arc of the second Elizabethan Age.

38  Gate Theatre
Straight from Ireland’s acclaimed Gate Theatre is a double-bill of two one-act plays by the great Irish modernist writer, playwright, and humorist Samuel Beckett. The Gate is largely considered the leading interpreter of Beckett in the world; it’s like seeing the Maly Drama Theatre perform Chekhov or The Globe perform Shakespeare. Endgame, like Waiting for Godot, is considered one of Beckett’s most important works, written in a style associated with the Theatre of the Absurd. Watt, a novel written while Beckett was in hiding during World War II, is the extraordinary story of an itinerant character who one day walks from a train station to the home of a Mr. Knott, whom he will serve. The bizarre adventures of Watt and his struggles to make sense of the world around him are told with elegant simplicity, immense pathos, and explosive humor. Barry McGovern, who performs the role of Watt, selected the texts from the novel for this one-man performance. "Quite simply outstanding...I got an almost delirious joy from hearing, and seeing, an hour-long distillation of Beckett’s novel, Watt." (Guardian)

39  Stile Antico
One of the most talked-about events two years ago was the young British  ensemble Stile Antico, which is now firmly established as one of the  most original and exciting new groups in the choral music world. The  group’s most recent release, Song of Songs, won the 2009  Gramophone Award for Early Music. Working without a conductor, the 12  members of Stile Antico rehearse and perform as chamber musicians, each  contributing artistically to the end result. Their performances have  been repeatedly praised for their vitality and commitment, expressive  lucidity, and imaginative response to text. For this return engagement,  Stile Antico moves across town to the beautiful sanctuary of St.  Andrew’s Episcopal Church, where they will perform a program of Tudor  music for Christmas and Advent. The program is centered on Thomas  Tallis’s magnificent seven-part “Christmas” mass, written for the  combined choirs of the Spanish and English Chapels Royal and first  performed in December 1554. The mass is interspersed with  contemporaneous liturgical settings for Advent and Christmas, from the  perfect miniatures of William Byrd’s exquisite Propers for the Fourth  Sunday of Advent to Robert White’s exuberant setting of the Magnificat  and John Sheppard’s extraordinary Verbum Caro.

40  Einstein on the Beac
“The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious.” — Albert Einstein
Widely credited as one of the greatest artistic achievements of the 20th  century, this rarely performed and revolutionary work launched director  Robert Wilson and composer Philip Glass to international success when  it was first produced in Avignon, France in 1976 with subsequent  performances in Europe and at the Metropolitan Opera. It is still  recognized as one of their greatest masterpieces. Now, nearly four  decades after it was first performed and 20 years since its last  production, Einstein on the Beach will be reconstructed for a major international tour including the first North American presentations ever held outside of New York City.
Einstein on the Beach breaks all of the rules of conventional  opera. Instead of a traditional orchestral arrangement, Glass composed  for the synthesizers, woodwinds, and voices of the Philip Glass  Ensemble. Non-narrative in form, the work uses a series of powerful  recurrent images as its main dramatic device, shown in juxtaposition  with abstract dance sequences created by American choreographer Lucinda  Childs. There are no traditional intermissions; audiences are free to  wander in and out at liberty during the five-hour performance. The New York Times  critic John Rockwell said, “Einstein was like nothing I had ever  encountered…Its very elusiveness radiated richly, like some dark star  whose effects we can only feel…Einstein on the Beach, perhaps  like Einstein himself, transcended time. It’s not (just) an artifact of  its era, it’s timeless…an experience to cherish for a lifetime.”
Prior to the production’s final technical rehearsals and world première in Montpellier, France, UMS will host the production’s creators, musicians, performers, and crew for three weeks  as they reconstruct and rehearse the work for what is likely to be the  final world tour designed and led by its original creators. A rare  chance to see a work of this scale in progress, these preview  performances will be the only opportunity to see Einstein on the Beach in the Midwest.

41  Chamber Ens of the S
The 20 members of the Chamber Ensemble of the Shanghai Chinese Orchestra  are drawn from the first large-scale modern orchestra of traditional  instruments in China. The Chamber Ensemble features music that  represents the gallant warriors of the past, the happy days of  childhood, a foggy spring morning after a night of rain, and other  poetic images brought to life by these iconic musicians. They perform on  the zheng, dizi, erhu, pipa, and other Chinese instruments  seldom featured in the West. While Chinese stars such as Lang Lang have  brought new attention to Western classical music in China, this ensemble  provides a window into the traditional Chinese classical music that  dates back centuries.

42  Zakir Hussain
Zakir Hussain is today appreciated both in the field of percussion and  in the music world at large as an international phenomenon. His playing  is marked by uncanny intuition and masterful improvisational dexterity,  founded in formidable knowledge and study. The favorite accompanist of  many of India’s greatest classical musicians and dancers, he has not let  his genius rest there. Hussain is widely considered a chief architect  of the contemporary world music movement, with many historic  collaborations including Shakti, which he founded with John McLaughlin  and L. Shankar in the early 1970s, Sangam with Charles Lloyd and Eric  Harland, and recordings and performances with artists as diverse as  George Harrison, Van Morrison, Rennie Harris, and the Kodo Drummers of  Japan. For this return appearance, he performs with a host of Indian  classical music greats, topped off by the dancing drummers of Manipur.

43  Aspen Santa Fe Balle
“Simply breathtaking,” proclaims the Chicago Sun-Times about Aspen Santa  Fe Ballet, whose UMS debut features a program of contemporary ballet  that exemplifies the company’s commitment to commissioning dance by both  world-renowned and emerging choreographers. With a European aesthetic  grounded in American sensibilities, this 11-member troupe of classically  trained dancers has developed a worldwide following. “Stark, sleek, and  chock-full of moves that skirt the edges of contemporary movement.” (The Boston Globe)
Aspen Santa Fe Ballet began in Aspen in 1996, and a partnership four  years later led to the creation of a company that splits its time  between Aspen and Santa Fe. Artistic director Tom Mossbrucker, a former  principal dancer with the Joffrey Ballet, has been with the company  since the beginning. He is dedicated to presenting an eclectic  repertoire and committed to acquiring new works that persistently  challenge, enliven, and education both audiences and the company  dancers.

44  Rhinoceros
A farce. A tragedy. An experiment of the mind. Rhinocéros was  initially a short story written in 1957 by Eugène Ionesco (1909-1994),  who was influenced by his time in Romania as a young man when nearly  everyone around him converted to fascism. Alongside Samuel Beckett, Jean  Genet, and Harold Pinter, Ionesco was a major figure of the “Theater of  the Absurd.”
Rhinocéros begins in a small town square where Jean meets his  apathetic friend Berenger for a drink. A rhinoceros runs through the  square, shocking all except Berenger. The square is soon overrun as  people in the town begin to transform into rhinos. Berenger, on the  other hand, transforms from being indifferent and aimless to a having  something to believe in and fight against: the tyranny of the rhinos. A  parable about French collaboration with the Nazis, Rhinocéros serves as a metaphor for people resisting the crowd and standing up for their own ideas.
The Théâtre de la Ville production of Rhinocéros has been hailed  for its illuminating and insightful approach to Ionesco’s celebrated  play, skillfully setting astonishing moments of physical theater and  movement in a staging that showcases both the haunting beauty of  Ionesco’s words and his singular vision for the stage. Remaining true to  the spirit and letter of the play, the production rekindles the  staggering sense of urgency and risk conveyed by the script, as it  depicts the struggle of one man to maintain his individual identity and  integrity in a world where others have successively yielded to the  inevitable domination of brute force. When the play was first presented  in Paris, critics were ecstatic. “A masterpiece,” raved Le Monde. “A veritable tour de force on the part of the director… [and] a magical embrace between the show and the spectator.”
Experimental, emotional, and emphatic – this performance is not to be missed.
Performed in French with English supertitles.

45  Gilberto Gil
Gilberto Gil has modernized – and continues to modernize – Brazilian  popular music. From musical revolutionary to international pop star to  beloved statesman, Gilberto Gil has lived a life worthy of a Hollywood  thriller. As a founding member of Brazil’s Tropicália movement, Gil and  fellow Bahians Caetano Veloso and Gal Costa radically reinvented  Brazilian popular music in the mid-60s by combining Beatlesque  psychedelia, art rock, and Brazil’s northeastern roots rhythms. Since  returning to Brazil from his London exile in the early 1970s, Gil has  held center stage as a charismatic performer and songwriter. With  several dozen standards to his credit, he has been interpreted by just  about every major Brazilian artist of the past four decades. In recent  years Gil once again found inspiration in the joyful, upbeat  accordion-driven forró style of music and dance, starting with his soundtrack to the award-winning 2000 film Me You Them. After serving as Brazil’s Minister of Culture from 2003-2008, he went on to explore classics by forró heroes Luiz Gonzaga and Jackson do Pandeiro on his latest album, Fé Na Festa. Expect a party — and expect to dig deeply into Brazil’s musical heritage with one of the country’s major cultural icons.
Note: This concert will be primarily performed in Gilberto Gil’s native Brazilian Portuguese.

46  Prudencia Hart
Join us for a spellbinding and intimate experience – where you become part of the performance.
Pull up a chair and wet your whistle for an evening of anarchic theater,  live music, and strange goings-on as UMS takes theater into the pub,  moving to the Corner Brewery in Ypsilanti for six performances.
One wintry morning, Prudencia Hart, an uptight academic, sets off to  attend a conference in the Scottish Borders, the region of Scotland that  borders England. As the snow begins to fall, she finds herself trapped  in a secluded bar with strangers, only to be swept away on an  enchanting, dream-like journey of self-discovery filled with magical  moments, devilish encounters, and wittily wild karaoke.

47  Martha Graham Dance
Founded in 1926 by pioneering choreographer Martha Graham, this modern  dance company is one of the oldest and most celebrated in America.  Graham’s innovative body of work stands alongside that of Pablo Picasso,  Igor Stravinsky, George Balanchine, and Coco Chanel as a pillar of  20th-century Modernism. Her company has performed all over the world,  including at the base of the Great Pyramids and in the ancient Herod  Atticus Theatre on the Acropolis. The Martha Graham Dance Company has  nurtured many choreographers of the 20th and 21st centuries, including  Merce Cunningham, Pearl Lang, Paul Taylor, Pascal Rioult, and U-M’s  Peter Sparling, whose film montage opens Friday’s program. The Saturday  evening performance brings back the work of Robert Wilson (Einstein on the Beach),  who created a magical evocation of Graham as an artist, using abstract  forms and movements to recall the American images that gave meaning to  her work and her life.

48  Mariachi Vargas de T
We are proud to bring back Mariachi Vargas de Tecalitlán after an  extremely popular UMS debut in November 2010. Mariachi Vargas is one of  the most highly regarded ensembles in the history of mariachi,  decisively shaping the art form. Founded in a small city near Jalisco by  Don Gaspar Vargas in the 1890s, this band basically invented the modern  mariachi, and five generations later, is still playing today. They have  recorded over 100 CDs, with original songs and arrangements that set  the standard for mariachi music. Masters at melding the old world style  of mariachi music with new, innovative pieces, Mariachi Vargas is  appealing to audiences across all generations.

49  The Silk Road Ensemb
Yo-Yo Ma thinks it can: “I believe that when we enlarge our view of the  world, we deepen our understanding of our own lives and culture.”
“Yo-Yo Ma is part modern Marco Polo, an explorer of cultures far beyond  his own; part musical missionary, eager to share ideas and make vital  connections between peoples.” (Chicago Tribune) Founded by Yo-Yo  Ma in 1998, the Silk Road Project is about “seeing the world’s multiple  perspectives, stirring the imagination, getting people to dream.” It has  been a catalyst for a new kind of conversation, opening avenues of  inter-cultural communication and collaborative thinking. For about 2,000  years the Silk Road was the main conduit for the spread and exchange of  goods, ideas, religions, and culture, connecting people from Asia to  the Mediterranean. The collective is drawn from internationally renowned  musicians who share traditions from various cultures and develop and  perform new music and multimedia pieces, exploring and expanding  contemporary music crossroads. Yo-Yo Ma believes that “when we enlarge  our view of the world, we deepen our understanding of our own lives and  culture.”
At this concert, Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk Road Project will be recognized  as recipients of the 2013 UMS Distinguished Artists Award, presented as  part of the Ford Honors Program.

50  Ragamala Dance
Sacred Earth reframes the cultural specificity of Bharatanatyam,  bringing the eloquence of the form to universal themes in order to move  beyond the personal and spark a global conversation.
Experience a single evening that transcends barriers of culture,  ethnicity, nationality, and geography and speaks to a broad audience.  Choreographers Ranee and Aparna Ramaswamy use the philosophy and myth of  traditions to explore the interconnectedness between humans and the  landscapes that shape them. Accompanied by live music, the evening  builds from silent, meditative beginnings to a thrilling crescendo, the  performers surrender to the beauty of this sacred earth that has been  given to us to safeguard, cherish, and pass on to our future  generations.
Sacred Earth’s choreography, ranging from contemplative to  ecstatic, brings both internal (akam) and external (puram) landscapes to  life through two ephemeral visual traditions—kolam floor designs and  Warli wall paintings.  Kolams are rice flour designs made each morning  by women in southern India as conscious offerings to Mother Earth. This  daily ritual creates a sacred space and becomes a link between the  intimate home and the vastness of the outside world. The Warli people of  western India revere the land and live a life in perfect coexistence  with nature. Using their everyday lives as inspiration, their dynamic  wall paintings use art to find the spiritual in the everyday.

51  Complicite
Inspired by the work of one of the most important Japanese writers of the 20th century, Jun’ichiro Tanizaki, Shun-kin  tells a tale of devotion, passion, and power, where beauty is  unforgiving and love is blinding. The domineering and beautiful  Shun-kin, blinded as a young girl, is a brilliant player of the shamisen,  a stringed instrument. Her devoted student and servant will do anything  to share her world, ultimately becoming her lover and performing an  astonishing act of self-sacrifice. This powerful production, seen only  at the Lincoln Center, UCLA, and UMS, explores the relationship between  master teacher and student, showing just how fraught that relationship  can be. In Japanese with English supertitles.

52  Chris Thile
Chris Thile, of the progressive bluegrass band Punch Brothers, is a  mandolin virtuoso, composer, and vocalist. Encompassing progressive  bluegrass, classical, rock, and jazz, Thile transcends the borders of  conventionally circumscribed genres, creating a distinctly American  canon and a new musical aesthetic for performers and audiences alike.  Recently awarded a MacArthur “Genius” Grant (2013), Thile collaborated  with Yo-Yo Ma and Edgar Meyer on the Grammy-winning CD, The Goat Rodeo Sessions.  On this solo program, he draws from his recent recording of Bach  sonatas and partitas while also exploring his own compositions and  contemporary music.

53  Blind Summit
A cantankerous puppet with a cardboard head is having an existential  crisis on a table. Blind Summit, theatrical innovators who have created  puppetry for Anthony Minghella, Complicite, and Danny Boyle’s Olympic  Opening Ceremony, presents epic puppetry inspired by Beckett, the Bible,  and Ikea. Hilarious, beautiful, and occasionally profound, this show is  a visual feast of Bunraku puppetry. “With considerable wit, Blind  Summit proves once again that when you’re working in miniature, you  don’t have to think small.” (The Guardian)

54  RSC in HD - Richard
This first-ever cinema broadcast from the stage of the RSC features David Tennant in the title role of Richard II,  the fastest selling show in the RSC’s history and the first of  Shakespeare’s four plays about the House of Lancaster. Richard is King,  but also a man of very human weakness. But he is also a man of very  human weakness, a man whose vanity threatens to divide the great houses  of England and drag his people into a dynastic civil war that will last  100 years.

55  State Symphony Capel
Featuring 50 glorious voices, the State Symphony Capella of Russia was  founded in 1991 as a result of a merger of the USSR State Chamber Choir  and the State Symphony Orchestra of the USSR Ministry of Culture.  Specialists admire the strict performing discipline that reigns in the  collective, which results in beautiful flexibility of phrasing, a rich  and warm sound, noble expression, and skillful balance. Their flawless  vocal and choral technique, crystal-clear and precise intonation, and  unfailing attention to poetic words has led to captivating reviews,  including this one from Le Monde de la Musique in France: "What a  choir! Beautiful, noble, ideally balanced, diversity of timbres,  flawless, clear intonation…We can only dream about such a choir."

56  New Century Chamber
This San Francisco-based group made its UMS debut in February 2011 to  huge audience acclaim with a performance of remarkable precision,  passion, and power. Their return appearance with artistic director Nadja  Salerno-Sonnenberg offers the area premiere of a new work that NCCO  commissioned by U-M Professor Emeritus of Composition William Bolcom, as  well as Heitor Villa-Lobos’ hauntingly beautiful Bachianas Brasileiras No. 5.  “Salerno-Sonnenberg was and most definitely is a force to be reckoned  with [and] the superb musicianship of her cohorts ensured that it was  far more than her show.” (San Francisco Classical Voice)

57  Emerson String Quart
Formed in the bicentennial year of the United States, the Emerson String  Quartet took its name from the great American poet and philosopher  Ralph Waldo Emerson. The group made its Ann Arbor debut in 1989, and in  14 appearances since has performed with the integrity, energy, and  commitment that it has demonstrated throughout more than 30 years of  extensive touring and recording. The Emerson’s unparalleled achievements  over the past three decades include nine Grammy awards (two for "Best  Classical Album," an unprecedented honor for a chamber music group),  three Gramophone Awards, the coveted Avery Fisher Prize, membership in  the American Classical Music Hall of Fame, and cycles of the complete  string quartets of Beethoven, Bartók, Mendelssohn, and Shostakovich in  the world’s music capitals. This return appearance features the Quartet  in an all-Mozart program, performing three quartets commissioned by the  King of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm II. “With musicians like this, there  must be some hope for humanity.” (The Times, London)

58  Les Violons du Roy
The chamber orchestra Les Violons du Roy borrows its name from the  renowned string orchestra of the court of the French kings. Based in  Québec City, the 15-member group was brought together in 1984 by music  director Bernard Labadie. They specialize in the vast repertoire of  music for chamber orchestra, performed on modern instruments in the  style most appropriate to each era. The orchestra has been widely  acclaimed for the exceptional energy, brilliance, and vitality of its  performances. The ensemble appeared with countertenor David Daniels for a  UMS Chamber Arts series concert in St. Francis church in 2001; now it  returns with Swiss recorder virtuoso Maurice Steger, a "wonderfully deft  player, with absolute clarity of note and line, even in the most  virtuosic variations." (Fanfare)

59  Mark Morris Dance Gr
The Washington Post called Mark Morris "our Mozart of modern dance. There is that same sense of easy fecundity, his air of an aging, congenial enfant terrible,  the sheer brilliance and wealth of his choreographic invention." Morris  has changed the way that audiences see modern dance, with unique  artistry that reflects a profound and sophisticated love of music. His  company of exuberant dancers lives up to its reputation of wit, grace,  and a refined musicality that is further reinforced by Morris's use of  live musicians in every performance. Of Socrates, the San Francisco Chronicle  enthused, "What Morris captures is a mood that evolves from jubilant to  resigned. This may be his most elegiac work, and it will always seem  like a special event." The New York Times added, "Socrates, though not simple, is simply beautiful."

60  Takacs Quartet
Takacs Quartet returns to Ann Arbor for their 16th UMS appearance since 1984.
Recognized as one of the world’s great ensembles, the Takacs Quartet  plays with a unique blend of drama, warmth, and humor, combining four  distinct musical personalities to bring fresh insights to the string  quartet repertoire.
“Every time one is blown away by the rightness and freshness of everything they do,” (The Guardian, London).

61  Ahmad Jamal
Ahmad Jamal is not just a living legend of jazz; he is one of the most inspired and inspiring artists in music today.” (AllAboutJazz.com) A pivotal influence on Miles Davis and countless others, NEA Jazz Master Ahmad Jamal incorporates a unique sense of space in his music — his musical concepts are exciting while confidently understated. Like Louis Armstrong, Jamal is an exemplary ensemble player, someone who listens and responds with total command of the keyboard. His charismatic swing and daringly inventive solos always tell a story. Born in Pittsburgh 81 years ago, Jamal is playing better than ever, with lifetime achievement awards feeling premature given his ongoing desire to push the genre forward. He returns after his UMS debut in 2008 with the ensemble from his 2010 release, A Quiet Time, which features drummer Herlin Riley, who was for many years the drummer in the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra.

62  Goran Bregovic
"It was party time…a Balkan free-for-all, and the jam-packed auditorium went wild…" (The Jerusalem Post) Balkan music icon and acclaimed film composer Goran Bregovic celebrates the music of Europe’s Gypsy tradition. With a 20-piece ensemble consisting of a Serbian Gypsy band, a classical string ensemble, an all-male choir, two Bulgarian female singers, and Bregovic’s own electric guitar, the music blends raucous Gypsy dance tunes with traditional Eastern European choral music, spinning it all through a rock-and-roll cycle.

63  Cloud Gate Dance The
The virtuosity of the dancers from the Taiwanese company Cloud Gate has caused critics to rave that they "possess a control and articulation that verge on the superhuman." (Chicago Sun-Times) Trained in tai chi, meditation, Chinese opera movement, modern dance, and ballet, the company performs a rich repertoire with roots in Asian myths, folklore, and aesthetics, all infused with a contemporary perspective. For this long-awaited UMS debut, Cloud Gate presents Lin Hwai-min’s newest work, Water Stains on the Wall. The white set looks like a blank piece of rice paper traditionally used by Chinese calligraphers and painters, onto which images of drifting clouds in different degrees of blackness are projected, with dancers grounded on a tilted floor yet appearing to float. They look like flowing ink, creating exquisite spaces that are constantly shifting, reminding one of Chinese classical landscape painting. Luxuriating in the sheer joy of movement, these remarkably fluid performers make stillness every bit as breathtaking as action. "Water stains on the wall" is a popular metaphor that represents the highest state in the aesthetics of Chinese calligraphy. Hwai-min and dancers take off from this metaphor and create an abstract work of beauty and magic that stands sublimely on its own.

64  Diego El Cigala
Flamenco has to be suffered,” Diego El Cigala asserted in a New York Times interview. “How do you convey emotions from within your heart if you don’t know what suffering is? If there is no evidence of pain in your heart, there is no song.” Nicknamed “El Cigala” (Norway Lobster) for his thin frame and strong voice, Diego is an internationally celebrated Gitano flamenco singer and contemporary flamenco’s most compelling voice. His mother and father were both accomplished practitioners of flamenco, as were his grandparents. He started off singing for well-known flamenco dancers but has since “moved to the front,” which in flamenco slang means to sing on one’s own instead of accompanying a dancer. He is noted for being a pioneer in fusing flamenco with other Latin American music forms such as the bolero, Afro-Caribbean jazz, and tango. His latest project, Cigala & Tango, is the musical testimony to his concert at the legendary Teatro Gran Rex in Buenos Aires last April. The legendary Paco de Lucía says, “Diego has one of the most beautiful flamenco voices of our time, a voice of sweetness that flows over everything. When I listen to him, it warms my heart.” The New York Times adds, “He radiates a magnetic mix of winking charm and unpredictable vitriol reminiscent of a singer from an entirely different milieu, Frank Sinatra.”

65  AnDa Union
Formed in 2003, AnDa Union is part of a musical movement that is finding inspiration in old and forgotten folk music from the nomadic herdsman cultures of Inner and Outer Mongolia, drawing on a repertoire of music that all but disappeared during China’s recent tumultuous past. The group’s 14 members all hail from the Xilingol Grassland area of Inner Mongolia, a semi-autonomous region of China. They describe themselves as “music gatherers” who dig deep into Mongol traditions to unearth forgotten music — music as it might have been played late into the evening in the camps of Genghis Khan. Its members are accomplished singers and instrumentalists, performing on the traditional horse-head fiddle (tsuur), a three-holed flute (maodun chaoer) as well as Mongolian versions of the dulcimer, zither, lute, and mouth harp. The main singing style is khoomii, commonly referred to as throat singing, a traditional type of Mongolian overtone singing that replicates the sound of nature. The performance will be preceded on November 8 by a captivating documentary film that follows the group on a journey through the vibrant capital of Hohhot and the wild and varied landscapes of the Inner Mongolian grasslands and mountains, where they discover the secrets of their haunting and beautiful music. While wholeheartedly embracing modern society in all its facets, the Mongolian people are a culture fighting for survival in an increasingly industrialized world.

66  A Night in Treme
The Treme (pronounced truh-MAY) neighborhood of New Orleans has been a source of African-American music and culture for as long as cooks in the Crescent City have been serving red beans and rice on Monday nights. Birthplace of the great New Orleans brass band tradition and one of the first black neighborhoods in America, Treme is the heartbeat of New Orleans and home to Congo Square. This concert features the Rebirth Brass Band, known for combining traditional brass band sound with funk, jazz, soul, and hip hop and for embracing the quintessential New Orleans art form “second line,” whereby the band is followed by jubilant dancing. In addition to being a pillar of the New Orleans music scene, the Rebirth Brass Band was featured in the opening scene and on the Grammy nominated soundtrack of David Simon’s hit HBO show "Treme," which follows a group of New Orleaneans who are rebuilding their lives after Hurricane Katrina. The concert takes place in conjunction with the HBO show’s second season. Donald Harrison, Jr., Christian Scott, Glen David Andrews, and Dr. Michael White join the Rebirth Brass Band in this personal celebration of New Orleans music and heritage.

67  Sweet Honey In The R
Sweet Honey In The Rock focuses on music that challenges, inspires, teaches, encourages, and empowers audiences from all walks of life to become interested and involved in issues that are central to their lives. For over three decades, Sweet Honey In The Rock has celebrated our collective humanity, singing about the challenging issues of racism; social, economic, and environmental injustice; equal rights; and the greed that seems to be pulling our nation apart. The group has built a distinguished legacy as one of the most celebrated ambassadors ofa cappella music, fusing five scintillating and soulful voices with the texture, harmonic blend, and raw quality that is indigenous and true to authentic a cappella music. They take audiences on journeys that span centuries of African-American history and culture — sound journeys that nurture and heal. In the tradition of artists in action — this is the group that sang at the rally when the University of Michigan defended its affirmative action position before the Supreme Court — Sweet Honey taps the spirit, encourages audiences to think, asks them to reflect, and inspires them to make a difference in their communities. Sign language interpreted.

68  Jazz at Lincoln Cent
Performing music that links today’s improvisers with the rich history of traditional and contemporary big-band composition, Wynton Marsalis’s Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra brings an expansive range of music to the most treasured international stages. Despite one of the most aggressive touring schedules in the business, JLCO makes each concert fresh, drawing in audiences who are continually energized and amazed by the group’s depth of outrageous talent.
The Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra with Wynton Marsalis is so far from the usual big-band cliché that it’s mind-blowing.” (Dallas) Since 1988, Wynton Marsalis has led the 15-piece Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, which simultaneously honors the rich heritage of Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong while presenting a stunning variety of new works from illustrious names, many of whom perform regularly with the ensemble. From swinging to supple, sophisticated to spirited, it’s all sheer jazz perfection — and no wonder these annual appearances have become a favorite of UMS audiences. “You know it’s a good gig when you can’t tell if the band or the audience is having more fun.” (Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel)

69  The Andersen Project
"Filled to the brim with his trademark humor and visual and technological brilliance, this off-the-wall masterpiece by Canadian theater visionary Robert Lepage stars Yves Jacques (Far Side of the Moon) in a one-man tour-de-force about a Canadian writer from the rock-and-roll milieu who is unexpectedly commissioned by the Opera Garnier in Paris to write a libretto for a children’s opera. Arriving in Paris, he finds that his living quarters for the next three months, which he acquired through an apartment swap with a friend, are in a building that is also home to a peep show in the city’s red light district. Freely inspired by the timeless fables written by Hans Christian Andersen who, as it turns out, didn’t really like children, as well as anecdotes from his personal diaries, The Andersen Projectkeenly explores unraveling relationships, personal demons, the thirst for recognition, and compromise that comes too late. The piece was commissioned by the Danish government in 2005 to mark the bicentennial of the birth of that country’s most beloved writer. “A theatrical conjurer, whose dazzling shows have captivated audiences around the world with their mixture of storytelling and stunning imagery." (Guardian, London, on Robert Lepage)
Content appropriate for mature audiences only. Performed in English and French (with projected titles). A strobe light is used in this performance.

70  From Cass Corridor
Every city has had a Golden Age. In most places, the Golden Age dies, but in Detroit it remains unbroken through many different forms, from Jazz to Motown to techno and hip-hop.
On Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, UMS and the U-M MLK Day Symposium celebrate the very unique relationship of the city of Detroit to the music it helped create and shape. Beginning with trumpeter and educator Gerald Wilson (a Cass Technical High School graduate) and continuing through the great Detroit artists and mentors who have sustained the music through the second half of the 20th century, Detroit continues to nurture and create international trends in contemporary music-making and songwriting. With world-renowned jazz pianist and Detroit native Geri Allen serving as music director and the D3 trio serving as house band, From Cass Corridor to the Worldmusically narrates this spectacular and unique journey with celebrated Detroit artists.
A co-presentation with the University of Michigan Office of Academic Multicultural Initiatives.
Featuring the
D-3 Trio
Geri Allen, Music Director and Piano
Robert Hurst, Bass
Karriem Riggins, Drums
with very special guests
Marcus Belgrave, Trumpet
George Shirley, Vocals and Spoken Word
James Carter, Saxophones and Flutes
Ali Jackson, Drums
Dwight Andrews, Saxophones and Flutes
Ralph Jones, Saxophones and Flutes
Ralphe Armstrong, Bass
David McMurray, Saxophones
Perry Hughes, Guitar
A. Spencer Barefield, Guitar
Marion Hayden, Bass
Rayse Biggs, Trumpet
Vincent Bowens, Saxophones and Flute
Vincent Chandler, Trombone
Gayelynn McKinney, Drums
Joan Belgrave, Vocals
Shahida Nurullah, Vocals
Naima Shamborguer, Vocals
Ursula Walker, Vocals
Patrice “Kafi” Williams, Harp
Invincible, emcee
Gerard Gibbs, Organ
with the University of Michigan MLK Day Choir
Eugene Rogers, Conductor
and the
Motown Legends Gospel Choir
Al Chisholm, Director

71  JLCO with Wynton
The JAZZ AT LINCOLN CENTER ORCHESTRA (JLCO), comprising 15 of the finest jazz soloists and ensemble players today, has been the Jazz at Lincoln Center resident orchestra since 1988. Featured in all aspects of Jazz at Lincoln Center’s programming, this remarkably versatile orchestra performs and leads educational events in New York, across the US, and around the globe; in concert halls, dance venues, jazz clubs, and public parks; and with symphony orchestras, ballet troupes, local students, and an everexpanding roster of guest artists. Education is a major part of Jazz at Lincoln Center’s mission and its educational activities are coordinated with concert and Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra tour programming. These programs, many of which feature Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra members, include the celebrated Jazz for Young People concert series, the Essentially Ellington High School Jazz Band Competition and Festival, the Jazz for Young People Curriculum, and educational residencies, workshops, and concerts for both students and adults worldwide. Jazz at Lincoln Center educational programs reach over 110,000 students, teachers, and general audience members. Under Music Director Wynton Marsalis, the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra spends over a third of the year on tour. The big band performs a vast repertoire, from rare historic compositions to Jazz at Lincoln Centercommissioned works, including compositions and arrangements by Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Fletcher Henderson, Thelonious Monk, Mary Lou Williams, Billy Strayhorn, Dizzy Gillespie, Benny Goodman, and Charles Mingus. Guest conductors have included Benny Carter, John Lewis, Jimmy Heath, Chico O’Farrill, Paquito D’Rivera, Jon Faddis, Robert Sadin, David Berger, and Gerald Wilson. Over the last few years, the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra has performed collaborations with many of the world’s leading symphony orchestras; including the New York Philharmonic; the Russian National Orchestra; the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra; the Boston, Chicago, and London Symphony O r c h e s t ra s ; a n d t h e O r c h e s t ra Esperimentale in São Paolo, Brazil. The JLCO has also been featured in several education and performance residencies in the last few years, including those in France, Italy, Czech Republic, England, Switzerland, Germany, Brazil, and Japan. Television broadcasts of Jazz at Lincoln Center programs have helped broaden the awareness of its unique efforts in the music. Jazz at Lincoln Center has appeared on several XM Satellite Radio live broadcasts and eight Live From Lincoln Center broadcasts, carried by PBS stations nationwide; including a program which aired on October 18, 2004 during the grand opening of Jazz at Lincoln Center’s home, Frederick P. Rose Hall, and in September 2005 during Jazz at Lincoln Center’s Higher Ground Benefit Concert. To date, 14 recordings featuring the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra with Wynton Marsalis have been released and internationally distributed, the most recent of which being Vitoria Suite (2010), Portrait in Seven Shades (2010), and Congo Square (2007).

72  Angelique Kidjo
“I am a witness of my time,” says Angélique Kidjo, a bona fide world music superstar and activist from Benin who makes her UMS debut with this performance. “When your history is not written, you count on traditional singers to tell you who you are and what is going on in your society. That is what I do with my music.” With James Brown, Jimi Hendrix, Miriam Makeba, and Carlos Santana credited as influences, she brings a passion to her art that is filled with her amazing spirit and experiences from her life’s incredible journey. Angélique Kidjo is a UNICEF and Oxfam Goodwill Ambassador, has her own charitable organization dedicated to supporting the education of young girls in Africa, and passionately campaigns for women’s health in Africa. In 2011 she performed at the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony and concert and was named by The Guardian as one of the Top 100 most inspiring women in the world. A riveting performer, “[Kidjo’s] supercharged pipes have never sounded better, her irresistible energy and joie de vivre never more palpable.” (Los Angeles Times)

73  Amjad Ali Khan
“Amjad Ali Khan may be a master of the sarod rather than the guitar, but once he had built up to the crescendo of his solo set — improvising furiously around the melody line with repeated, rapid-fire playing and then letting his equally frantic tabla player take over — it was easy to see why great Indian music can be as exciting as classic blues and rock.” (The Guardian)
UMS welcomes sarod master Amjad Ali Khan for his UMS debut appearance this season. The sarod is smaller than the sitar and sits in the player’s lap. Its metal fingerboard has no frets and is played with the tips of the fingernails.
Amjad Ali Khan was only six years old when he gave his first sarod recital. After his debut, the career of this musical legend took off, and the Indian classical music scene was witness to regular and scintillating bursts of Raga supernovas. He was born to the illustrious Bangash lineage rooted in the Senia Bangash School and studied with his father and guru, the great Haafiz Ali Khan. Today he shoulders the sixth generation inheritance of this legendary lineage — and his sons, who perform with him, belong to the seventh generation.

74  Hamid Al-Saadi
When Iraqi heritage meets American jazz you get something “hypnotic and utterly unique.” (TimeOut Chicago) Hamid Al-Saadi is a master of the centuries-old tradition of Iraqi maqam, a system of melodic modes in traditional Arabic instrumental and vocal music. He is the only living performer who has mastered all of the compositions of the maqam repertoire. Due to its intricate details, variations, and highly demanding vocal techniques, very few performers master the entire repertoire.
Amir ElSaffar, an Iraqi-American trumpeter, santur player, vocalist, and composer, has distinguished himself with a mastery of disparate musical styles and a singular approach to combining aspects of Middle Eastern music with American jazz, extending the boundaries of each tradition. In 2002, he put his New York jazz career on hold to immerse himself in the music of his father’s ancestral past, the Iraqi maqam, and has made innovative strides in creating a language that reconciles and combines the aesthetics and techniques of jazz and Middle Eastern music.Two Rivers was commissioned by Vijay Iyer, Cecil Taylor, and Daniel Barenboim as a suite that invokes Iraqi musical traditions framed in a modern jazz setting. The resultant sound is new and fresh, differing considerably from other contemporary cross-cultural musical fusions.
This double-bill performance brings together the traditional and the ever-evolving. As Yo-Yo Ma says, “If we want to preserve a tradition, the best way to preserve it is to let it evolve.”

75  Esperanza Spalding
Esperanza Spalding, Double Bass, Electric Bass, and Vocals
Radio Music Society
Leo Genovese, Piano, Rhodes, and Keyboard
Lyndon Rochelle, Drums and Backing Vocals
Ricardo Vogt, Electric Guitar
Jeff Galindo, Trombone
Corey King, Trombone
Ben MacDonald, Trumpet
Leala Cyr, Trumpet and Backing Vocals
Dan Blake, Tenor and Soprano Saxophones
Hailey Niswanger, Alto Saxophone
Aaron Burnett, Baritone and Tenor Saxophones
Chris Turner, Backing Vocals
The 2011 Grammy winner for Best New Artist will demonstrate the power of song and how it can influence our lives.
With her ample talent and beauty, singer, bassist, and composer Esperanza Spalding instantly found herself ranked among the darlings of jazz despite — or perhaps because of — her unusual background. At 15 she left high school and, armed with a GED, entered Portland State University to study music. By age 20, she was one of the youngest faculty members in the history of the Berklee College of Music. At 26, she captured the world’s attention when she was awarded the 2010 Grammy for Best New Artist, the first time the award had gone to a jazz musician in 35 years. After wowing us as a member of Joe Lovano’s “Us Five” Quintet in 2007, she returns with her new album,Radio Music Society, which explores song forms and melodies that are formatted as “pop” songs. “Whether exploding into vocalese or making her bass solo sound like a horn, she’s a spark plug who dances as she grooves through a funked-up and rocked-out repertoire.” (Billboard)

76  Hubbard Street Dance
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago returns for a one-night-only program featuring choreography by William Forsythe. Raised in New York, Forsythe had a 20-year tenure as director of Ballett Frankfurt before starting his own company in Germany. He is one of the choreographers who changed ballet from its identification with 19th-century classical repertoire to a more dynamic, 21st-century art form. The program will include Quintett, Forsythe’s tribute to his wife, who died of cancer at the age of 32; N.N.N.N., a piece for four men; and One Flat Thing, reproduced, inspired by the risk and adventure of Robert Scott’s arctic expeditions, during which explorers relied on each other for survival. One Flat Thing is performed via performed within the confines of a tightly-spaced set of tables, a thrilling sequence of team choreography that runs dangerously close to reckless abandon.
What Makes It Renegade? William Forsythe is a true post-modernist dance maker who has defiantly turned ballet’s orientation away from its 19th-century traditions toward the future by embracing forward-looking aesthetic ideas — dance, voice, text, sound, visual art, and anything else at hand — to create trans-disciplinary works.

77  Manganiyar Seduction
Director Roysten Abel experimented boldly with the Manganiyars, desert musicians from Rajasthan, to create something startlingly new: The Manganiyar Seduction. Roysten’s concept created a dazzling union between the Manganiyars’ music and the visual seduction of Amsterdam’s Red Light District. Arranged in four horizontal rows, one on top of the other, 43 musicians are seated in 36 re-curtained cubicles. The show begins with a single cubicle lighting up to reveal the first performer, followed by another, and so on, creating a dramatic and musical roller coaster that transports listeners to an unknown world. “The effect is like that of a gospel Mass or a slow-building rave; a joyous, communal experience of the seductive power of music.” (Irish Independent) 

78  Ukulele Orchestra of
Renowned for its “perfectly polished professionalism, threaded through with dry wit and wry humor” (The Independent), the Ukulele Orchestra of Great Britain has seen over 9,000 days of ukulele action. This group of all-singing, all-strumming ukulele players holds that all genres of music are available for reinterpretation, as long as they are played on the ukulele. With instruments small and large, in high and low registers, playing intricate melodies, simple tunes, and complex chords, the ensemble wields the limitations of the instrument with virtuosic expertise, revealing unsuspected musical insight. With cheerful nods to both the pompous and the trivial, the “Ukes’” performances are at once moving and amusing, hailing the popular and the highbrow. 

79  Jerusalem String Qua
“An absolute triumph. Their playing has everything you could possibly wish for.” (BBC Music Magazine) Returning for their fifth UMS concert, the Jerusalem Quartet started some 20 years ago when its members were teenagers, and their confident energy and exquisite sensitivity have kept audiences on the edges of their seats since their UMS debut in 2005.

80  Bullet Catch
A stunt so dangerous that Houdini refused even to attempt it, the magic trick known as the Bullet Catch has claimed the lives of at least 12 illusionists, assistants, and spectators since its conception in 1613. Writer and performer Rob Drummond explores the history of the Bullet Catch, including the true story of William Henderson, who died in 1912 attempting the infamous trick. Drummond reads the minds of his audience as he leads them through a darkly humorous and engaging theatrical magic show featuring levitation, games of chance, and — for those who dare stay to the very end —the most notorious finale in show business.

81  Kronos Quartet
For 40 years, the Kronos Quartet has pursued a singular artistic vision, combining a spirit of fearless exploration with an ongoing commitment to re-imagining the string quartet experience. They started out as classical music’s original renegades and continue that cause to this very day. When asked to design a pair of concerts for UMS’s Renegade Series, they delivered. Their Friday concert is devoted to historical renegades, ranging from Richard Wagner to Laurie Anderson and George Crumb, representing a look at those composers who shook up the status quo over the past 150 years. Their Saturday concert takes a contemporary approach to the notion of Renegade, using their platform as artists to tell us stories of governmental power and war making run amok. String quartet playing as political act – renegade, indeed.

82  Dianne Reeves Quarte
Blue Note recording artist Dianne Reeves is one of the pre-eminent jazz vocalists in the world today. As a result of her virtuosity, improvisational prowess and unique jazz and R&B stylings, Dianne Reeves received the Grammy for Best Jazz Vocal Performance for three consecutive recordings – a Grammy first in any vocal category. She has recorded, performed, and collaborated extensively with Wynton Marsalis, the Chicago Symphony, and the Berlin Philharmonic. She returns with her quartet for her fourth UMS appearance — and her first in five years. This special concert opens with a set by Raul Midón, a blind singer-songwriter and guitarist whose distinct voice, strumming, beats, and vocal trumpet resulted in a standing ovation when he appeared on “Late Night with David Letterman” and an open invitation back to “The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.” He performed at The Ark in May 2010 and now makes his UMS debut. Guitar magazine describes him as “one of those rare musical forces that reminds us how strong and deep the connection between man and music can sometimes be.”

83  Kodo
Drums did more than make music in Japanese tradition. They were valuable tools found at every shrine. They marked the physical and metaphorical edge of a village. If you could hear them beat, you were part of the community. Kodo has lived this principle for 30 years, using thundering, soothing sounds that turn audiences into one big village from Asia to South America. “The drum is a ritual tool in Japan, played whenever a community needs to come together…If Kodo can bring drums and travel around the world and deliver the sound of drums there, we can unite the people who hear the sound and make them part of a community,” says Kodo member Jun Akimoto. Under its new artistic director, Kabuki luminary Tamasaburo Bando, the group’s 23rd UMS appearance features a brand-new performance that includes new visual flair alongside its high-energy percussion, elegant music, dance, and the striking physical prowess needed to sustain a precise yet powerful sound.

84  Propeller: Taming of
Propeller returns after its much talked-about 2011 performances of Richard III and The Comedy of Errors with new productions of Twelfth Night and The Taming of the Shrew, two comedies full of mistaken identities, transformations, and deceptions that ultimately reveal truth.
In The Taming of the Shrew, a man playing a boy dresses up as a girl, which confuses Christopher Sly. In Twelfth Night, a man plays a girl disguised as a boy, which confuses everybody.
Both plays explore beautifully how being in love with the wrong person can reveal true feeling.
Propeller uses an all-male cast as was done in Shakespeare’s day. Mixing a rigorous approach to the text with a modern physical aesthetic, the company updates the productions in surprising ways, with actors also performing live music.
“As directed by Edward Hall, Propeller specializes in knuckle-duster Shakespeare that digs for the harshness beneath the lyricism. Funny, antic, bawdy: the productions are all these expected things. But they also make sure that the chuckles stick in your throat. The poetry may still be pretty; the comedy definitely is not.” (The New York Times)

85  1927: The Animals an
A performance that takes film, music, performance, and storytelling and somehow makes it fit together beautifully.
The Animals and Children Took to the Streets is seamlessly synchronized to live music, performance and storytelling. With stunning films and animation, this is the wickedly twisted tale from the multiple award-winning company behind the international hit Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea. Like a giant graphic novel burst into life, 1927 invite you on a theatrical journey of startling originality.
Recommended for ages 8+.
“The macabre, musically ingenious, and graphically glorious company called 1927… anyone interested in theater should see this company now.” (The Observer)
“1927: Their star is on the ascendant and there is nothing quite like them.” (The Times)
“A wonderfully surreal step outside everyday life” (The Scotsman)
“This is a perfect alternative show. In fact, it is a perfect show.” (The Financial Times)
“A jaw droppingly clever and gloriously subversive parable…1927 conjure a world so complete it feels as if you’ve fallen down a rabbit hole” (Guardian)

86  NT - Othello
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. The National Theatre presents a major new production of William Shakespeare’s celebrated play about the destructive power of jealousy. Olivier Award-winning actor Adrian Lester (Henry V at the National Theatre) takes the title role. Playing opposite him as the duplicitous Iago is fellow Olivier Award-winner Rory Kinnear (The Last of the Haussmans), who is reunited with director Nicholas Hytner following their acclaimed collaboration on the National Theatre’s recent production of Hamlet. Othello, newly married to the young Desdemona, is appointed leader of a major military operation. Iago, passed over for promotion by Othello in favor of Cassio, persuades Othello that Cassio and Desdemona are having an affair.

87  Compagnie Kafig
Artistic director Mourad Merzouki is at the forefront of the international hip-hop dance scene. Käfig’s sensational double bill of Correria and Agwa derives from an encounter between Mourad and 11 young male dancers from Rio de Janeiro at the Lyon Dance Biennial in 2006. Their individual stories about life in the favelas (Brazilian shanty towns) and their determination to make something of themselves inspired Mourad to create two heart-stopping works that showcase the young Brazilians’ irresistible cocktail of athletic samba, hip-hop, and capoeira dance styles, highlighting astonishing acrobatic skills and dazzling virtuosity.
New this season! As part of our focus on dance in 2013-2014, a small set of tweet seats will be available at each dance performance, including the Friday, February 14 performance of Compagnie Kafig. Tweet seats are seats in which tweeting about the performance is permitted during the event. Interested in trying out a tweet seat? Call the UMS Ticket Office at 734.764.2538 or visit the Michigan League ticket office to order.

88  Theatre des Bouffes
There are shadows lurking in the periphery of even the most jovial surroundings. And there is no one better to explore these shadows with than the legendary stage and film director Peter Brook, whose 71-year career at the Royal Shakespeare Company, London’s West End, Paris’s Theatre des Bouffes du Nord and countless other companies has irrevocably changed contemporary theater. The Suit “brims with a gentle effervescence and musicality that you associated with entertainments usually described, a bit dismissively, as charming,” says theNew York Times. “Yet even as it draws you in like the gregarious host of an intimate party, this story of adultery in apartheid South Africa is quietly preparing to break your heart.” Brook’s tender production articulates the nuances of life’s highs and lows through a tale of simmering resentment that is less about betrayal than forgiveness – and the devastating heartbreak that can befall humans who are unable to forgive.

89  Sabine Meyer
Sabine Meyer was solo clarinetist with the Berlin Philharmonic, a position she left as she became increasingly in demand as a solo artist. Today, in addition to her recital and concerto appearances, she performs in two chamber ensembles, including the Trio di Clarone, whose other members are her husband and her brother. Trio di Clarone began in part because of their shared interest in the basset horn, a rare instrument in the clarinet family that was used in Mozart’s Requiem and in his five divertimenti written for a trio of basset horns. “And so the evening was one of those absolute godsends in musical experience that cannot be fathomed — simply a gift.” (Rems Zeitung)

90  Kidd Pivot
Integrating movement, original music, text, and rich visual design, Kidd Pivot’s performance work is assembled with recklessness and rigor, balancing sharp exactitude with irreverence and risk. Kidd Pivot’s distinct choreographic language, which fuses classical elements with the complexity and freedom of structured improvisation, is marked by a strong theatrical sensibility and a keen sense of wit and invention. The Tempest Replica is based on motifs from Shakespeare’s play. Artistic director Crystal Pite stages a game of revenge and forgiveness, reality and imagination. Canadian Crystal Pite danced with William Forsythe’s Ballett Frankfurt and serves as associate choreographer of Nederlands Dans Theater. Her company has been based in Vancouver since its founding in 2002.
“Pite’s as energetic as a sparkler and fluid as quicksilver.” - Ballet Tanz
Show notes: 80 minutes, no intermission

91  Berlin Philharmonic
Returning to Hill Auditorium for the first time since 2009, the Berlin Philharmonic and music director Simon Rattle embark on their last tour together, bringing two concerts to Ann Arbor as part of an orchestral residency.
For the first program, they perform Pierre Boulez’ Éclat, a tribute to the late titan's death earlier this year, paired with Mahler’s seldom-performed Symphony No. 7.
The second program combines German Romanticism with early works from composers in the Second Viennese School to provide a fascinating exploration of Viennese musical evolution over the course of 40 years.
“An enthralled crowd, listening agog to the amazing woodwind [quintet] from the Berlin Philharmonic, heard wind playing that was out of this world…Equally, however, the performance provided a unique opportunity for a microcosmic view of the philosophy and practice of the world’s most famous orchestra. Everything that you could see and hear, in intimate detail, that made this quintet so breathtakingly perfect, was a representation of the way the full band operates. An astonishing experience.” (The Herald, Glasgow)
An exquisite blend of wind instruments performing a selection of wind quintet pieces, the Berlin Philharmonic Wind Quintet continues to astonish audiences worldwide with their range of expression, tonal spectrum, and conceptual unity. Indeed, many listeners and critics agree that the ensemble has succeeded in virtually redefining the sound of the classic wind quintet, comprised of flute, oboe, clarinet, horn, and bassoon. U-M Professor Martin Katz, one of the most sought-after collaborative pianists, joins the ensemble for the Poulenc Sextet.

92  NT - She Stoops
For the third year, UMS and the Michigan Theater bring these high-definition screenings of live theater broadcasts by the National Theatre, London. The broadcasts feature plays produced by the National Theatre on cinema screens worldwide. In the US, the “live” screenings are delayed to accommodate the time difference. Broadcasts feature behind-the-scenes footage and interviews with actors.
Hardcastle, a man of substance, looks forward to acquainting his daughter with his old pal’s son with a view to marriage. But thanks to playboy Lumpkin, Hardcastle is mistaken by his prospective son-in-law Marlow for an innkeeper, and his daughter for the local barmaid. The good news is that while Marlow can barely speak to a woman of quality he’s a charmer with those of a different stamp. And so, as Hardcastle’s indignation intensifies, his daughter’s appreciation for her misguided suitor soars. Misdemeanors multiply, love blossoms, and mayhem ensues.
One of the great, generous-hearted and ingenious comedies of the English language, Goldsmith’s She Stoops to Conquer offers a celebration of chaos, courtship and the dysfunctional family.

93  NT - Macbeth
"High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. National Theatre Live will broadcast Manchester International Festival’s production of Macbeth, with Kenneth Branagh (My Week With Marilyn, Hamlet) in his first Shakespeare performance in over a decade as Macbeth, and Alex Kingston (Doctor Who, ER) as Lady Macbeth. Directed by Rob Ashford and Kenneth Branagh, this electrifying new production of Shakespeare’s tragic tale of ambition and treachery unfolds within the walls of an intimate deconsecrated Manchester church."
Discounted tickets for UMS Subscribers and Donors as well as Michigan Theater Members are available. Please call 734-764-2538 to purchase your tickets and receive that benefit.

94  Canadian Brass
Five tremendous brass musicians — each a virtuoso in his own right — form the legendary Canadian Brass. With an international reputation as one of the most popular brass ensembles today, Canadian Brass performs brass standards as well as a wide-ranging library of original arrangements created especially for them, including the works of Renaissance and Baroque masters, classical works, marches, holiday favorites, ragtime, Dixieland, big band, Broadway, and popular songs and standards. This Thanksgiving-weekend concert is sure to start your holidays off with a bang. Canadian Brass came about when friends Chuck Daellenbach (tuba, the only original member still playing with the group) and Gene Watts (trombone) got together to form a brass quintet in 1970. At the time, brass quintets were not entirely new, but they had never garnered the huge success that Canadian Brass has since made possible. Masters of concert presentation — from formal classical concerts to music served up with lively dialogue and theatrical effects — Canadian Brass has developed a uniquely engaging stage presence and rapport with audiences. The hallmark of any Canadian Brass performance is entertainment, spontaneity, virtuosity, and, most of all, fun.

95  Chanticleer
Hailed by The New Yorker as “the world’s reigning male chorus,” Chanticleer has developed a remarkable reputation for its vivid interpretations of vocal literature that spans 10 centuries, from Gregorian chant and Renaissance to jazz, gospel, and venturesome new music. Named for the “clear-singing” rooster in Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, Chanticleer is known for its seamless blend of 12 male voices ranging from countertenor to bass; the group “fascinates and enthralls for much the same reason a fine chocolate or a Rolls Royce does: through luxurious perfection.” (Los Angeles Times)

96  Charles Lloyd Quarte
Forty years ago, saxophonist Charles Lloyd was a pop star; his 1966 album, Forest Flower, sold a million copies. Four years ago, at 69, when most individuals are thinking of ways to slow down and kick back, Lloyd shifted to a higher gear and formed a new quartet. Lloyd has always led exceptional bands, and this is perhaps the best. With MacArthur fellow Jason Moran on piano, Reuben Rogers on bass, and Eric Harland on drums, the Quartet’s concerts are events of pristine beauty and elegance, full of intensely-felt emotion and passion that touch deep inside the heart. This is not entertainment, but the powerful uncorrupted expression of beauty through music. Lloyd’s latest release, Mirrors, “sees him attaining jazz nirvana, calling numbers that channel his love of Monk, eastern spiritualism, California, and traditional gospel music. Listening is like a meditation, and the sparse, taut accompaniment of the quartet keeps everything in focus.” (Jazz Choice)

97  NT - The Magistrate
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Academy Award nominee and Tony Award-winner John Lithgow (Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, Shrek, 3rd Rock from the Sun) takes the title role in Arthur Wing Pinero’s uproarious Victorian farce, directed by Olivier Award-winner Timothy Sheader (Crazy for You and Into the Woods, Regent’s Park Open Air Theatre, London).
In a similar vein to the National Theatre’s smash-hit classic comedies, She Stoops to Conquer and London Assurance, The Magistrate is sure to have audiences doubled up with laughter. When amiable magistrate Posket (John Lithgow) marries Agatha (Olivier Award-winner Nancy Carroll, After the Dance), little does he realise she’s dropped five years from her age – and her son’s. When her deception looks set to be revealed, it sparks a series of hilarious indignities and outrageous mishaps.

98  The King's Singers
Instantly recognizable for their immaculate intonation, vocal blend, diction, incisive timing, and delightfully British wit, they were one of the first groups that UMS President Ken Fischer presented, during an epic 1980s snowstorm in Washington, D.C., the group returns for Fischer’s final year before retiring with a special holiday program that includes works by Tchaikovsky, Lawson, and Pärt, as well as traditional seasonal songs drawn from the King’s Singers Christmas Songbook. “These six singers can do almost anything a full-sized chorus can do, with a degree of perfection that drops the jaw and delights the ear.” (Seattle Times)
Instantly recognizable from their spot-on intonation, impeccable vocal blend, flawless articulation of text, and incisive timing, The King’s Singers are consummate entertainers, charming the audience with a delightful British wit along with their stunning vocal performance. The group takes its name from King’s College Cambridge, where the original members were choral scholars. Composed of a bass, two baritones, a tenor, and two countertenors, The King’s Singers have a discography of over 150 recordings and have commissioned more than 200 works from prominent contemporary composers. A favorite of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, they performed together at the 2002 Winter Olympics. The group returns to Ann Arbor for the first time since 2005.

99  Schola Cantorum of V
What does joy sound like? Schola Cantorum de Venezuela is one of the most important choral societies from the growing choral movement in Venezuela. With a repertoire of more than 50 major symphonic-choral works, the 45-voice SCV is beloved by highly-acclaimed conductors and composers alike. The group has performed several premières by Osvaldo Golijov and John Adams and has appeared on over 35 recordings. The premier touring chorus of Latin America, the Schola Cantorum has a breathtaking range of repertoire, from sacred hymns and motets to propulsive rhythms and tuneful popular idioms of their rich Latin American culture. Every SCV concert is a vivid cultural and joyous experience. They bring infectious passion to each work they sing. Their Ann Arbor debut program, Water and Fiesta, features songs by composers from Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Uruguay, Cuba, Mexico, and the US.

100 Ariel Quartet
Characterized by its youth, brilliant playing, and soulful interpretations, the Ariel Quartet has earned a glowing international reputation in just a few years on the professional circuit. Formed in Israel, they moved to the US to study at the New England Conservatory’s prestigious Professional String Quartet Training Program and graduated in 2010. Cellist Alisa Weilerstein who last appeared with UMS in 2009, joins the ensemble for its UMS debut.

101 St Lawrence String Q
One of the great finds of the 09/10 season was the St. Lawrence String Quartet, which made its UMS debut in a stellar program of Haydn, Ravel, and John Adams. Haydn returns to the program for this appearance, which is bookended with the composer’s quartets. In between, the ensemble performs a new work by Osvaldo Golijov, the Argentinean composer who has worked with the SLSQ since the early 1990s. The SLSQ appears twice with UMS in the 11/12 season; they also perform a new work by John Adams with the San Francisco Symphony in March as part of the American Mavericks concerts.
The St. Lawrence String Quartet graced both Hill Auditorium (with the San Francisco Symphony) and Rackham Auditorium in 2012, reaffirming its undisputed reputation for imaginative and spontaneous music-making. They have “A sound that has just about everything one wants from a quartet, most notably precision, warmth and an electricity that conveys the excitement of playing whatever is on their stands at the moment.” (The New York Times)

102 Elias String Quartet
“A heaven-storming performance…Big things lie ahead of them.” (The Strad) Taking its name from the German form of Mendelssohn’s oratorio Elijah, the Elias String Quartet was founded in Manchester, England, in 1998 and has quickly established itself as one of the most intense and vibrant quartets of its generation. The group’s North American debut in 2012 included a sold-out concert at Carnegie Hall, with the Philadelphia Inquirer proclaiming, “Few quartets at any stage of their evolution have this much personality.” A UMS debut.

103 Brooklyn Rider
Béla Anton Leoš Fleck is named after three classical composers: the Hungarian Béla Bartók and the Czech composers Antonin Dvorák and Leoš Janácek. Known for his wicked banjo playing, he has been pushing the boundaries of the instrument for over 30 years. He performs his new quintet for banjo and string quartet with Brooklyn Rider, a group at home in both clubs and concert halls with appearances in venues as varied as Joe’s Pub, the Library of Congress, the SXSW Festival, and UMS’s Chamber Arts Series. The members of Brooklyn Rider are part of Yo-Yo Ma’s Silk Road Ensemble, and their “down-to-earth demeanor…demystifies contemporary classical music and invites everyone into the tent.” (Time Out New York)

104 NT - Collaborators
This new play by John Hodge (screenwriter of Trainspotting, Shallow Grave, and The Beach) centers on an imaginary encounter between Joseph Stalin and the playwright Mikhail Bulgakov (best known for his novel The Master and Margarita). Stars Alex Jennings (The Habit of Art) as Bulgakov and Simon Russell Beale (London Assurance) as Stalin.

105 The Tallis Scholars
The Tallis Scholars add a new dimension to UMS’s 11/12 focus on artistic renegades, presenting music of the wealthy Italian prince Carlo Gesualdo. Gesualdo’s infamy relates to his obsessive double murder of his wife and her lover, but he was also a maverick Renaissance composer whose eccentric approach to creating music — and whose colorful life story — inspired both Nadia Boulanger and Igor Stravinsky several hundred years later. His music contains wild gesticulations and abrupt surprises, and contemporary Renaissance scholars now regard him as perhaps the most forward-thinking, expressive, and sensual composer of his time. Consumed by guilt after murdering his wife, Gesualdo devoted himself to composing church music. At the centerpiece of this program is theTenebrae Responses for Holy Saturday, part of the liturgy for the final three days of Holy Week. Works by other “maverick” Renaissance composers round out the program.

106 Brahms's Requiem
A year after his mother died, Johannes Brahms began to compose a requiem in the German language; within three years, the work had grown from a choral piece into a cantata, and then a seven-movement Requiem for chorus, orchestra, and soprano and bass soloists. It is now considered one of his pinnacle works. Unlike other Requiems, the Brahms work was not composed as a mass for the dead, but rather as a consolation for those left behind. The UMS Choral Union and Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra perform this momentous work for the first time in over a decade under the leadership of UMS Choral Union music director Jerry Blackstone.

107 Los Angeles Guitar Q
The Los Angeles Guitar Quartet is one of the most multifaceted groups in any genre. Comprised of four uniquely accomplished musicians who bring a new energy to the concert stage with programs ranging from bluegrass to Bach, they consistently play to sold-out houses worldwide. Their inventive, critically acclaimed transcriptions of concert masterworks provide a fresh look at the music of the past, while their interpretations of works from the contemporary and world music realms continually break new ground. They return to Ann Arbor for the first time since 2007.

108 NT - War Horse
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Based on Michael Morpurgo’s novel and adapted for the stage by Nick Stafford, War Horse takes audiences on an extraordinary journey from the fields of rural Devon to the trenches of First World War France. With its stirring musical score, this powerfully moving and imaginative drama is a show of phenomenal inventiveness. At its heart are astonishing life-size puppets by South Africa’s Handspring Puppet Company, who bring breathing, galloping, charging horses to thrilling life on stage.

109 Cheikh Lo
Cheikh Lô is one of the great mavericks of African music. A superb singer and songwriter, as well as a distinctive guitaristand drummer, he has personalized and distilled a variety of influences from West and Central Africa to create a style that is uniquely his own. Lô dedicates both his life and music to Bave Fall, a specifically Senegalese form of Islam and part of the larger Islamic brotherhood of Mouridism, which emerged at the end of the 19th century from opposition to French colonialism. Bave Fall is distinguished visually by patchwork clothes and long dreadlocks that lead some to confuse it with Rastafarianism. Born to Senegalese parents in Burkina Faso near the Malian border, Lô was interested in music from an early age, running away from school to teach himself guitar and percussion on borrowed instruments. As a teenager, he was influenced by Cuban music, which was all the rage in West Africa at the time. After emigrating to Paris and then returning to Senegal in the late 1980s, Lô attracted both the attention of and comparisons to Youssou N’Dour, who produced two of his early albums. His signature sound, based on the popular national mbalax style, was an instant success in Senegal and prompted rave reviews on his European tour: “a compelling performer with energy and personality to match that of the early Bob Marley.” (The Guardian, London) More recently, Lô has immersed himself in the Dakar scene, and his return home is reflected in his new album, Jamm. His signature blend of semi-acoustic flavors — West and Central African, funk, Cuban, flamenco — has been distilled into his most mature, focused, yet diverse statement today, with his husky, sensual voice sounding better than ever.

110 Dave Holland
A bassist, composer, band leader and a master of time and rhythm, Dave Holland is in his fifth decade as a performer, and his music possesses a rich and kaleidoscopic history.
A seminal figure in post-1960s jazz, Dave Holland has never allowed his work to be limited by tradition. A master of tone and rhythm, the bassist, composer, and bandleader is now in his fifth decade as a performer, and his music possesses a rich and kaleidoscopic history. His path has led him from the frontiers of free improvisation to his modern ensembles that fully embody the Sam Rivers-instilled philosophy of “playing all of it.” The Wolverhampton, England, native got his big break from Miles Davis, with whom he played during the epochal Bitches Brew period. He formed his first working quintet in 1983 and continued to develop fruitful relationships with artists such as Anthony Braxton, Stan Getz, Cassandra Wilson, Jack DeJohnette, Chick Corea, Joe Henderson, Thelonious Monk, Betty Carter, Pat Metheny, Kenny Wheeler, Bill Frisell, Roy Haynes, and Herbie Hancock over the course of his career. This performance with his 13-piece big band is Dave Holland’s third appearance since his 2003 UMS debut. “One of the very best working bands in jazz.” (The New York Times)

111 Gabriel Kahane
Writing and performing music that moves effortlessly from dense modernism to spare vernacular song, pianist, composer, and singer Gabriel Kahane has established himself as a leading voice among a generation of young indie composers redefining music for the 21st century. Kahane performs with a variety of influential artists, including Chris Thile, Brad Mehldau, cellist Alisa Weilerstein, and his father, the noted pianist and conductor Jeffrey Kahane. He has also written the music and lyrics for February House, which ran at New York City’s Public Theater in 2012.
New to UMS, but not to Ann Arbor (he has performed at the Kerrytown Concert House), Kahane will be performing songs from his latest album, Where Are The Arms, along with material drawn from his diverse songbook and musical theater compositions. He performs with friends and collaborators yMusic, featuring guitarist/violinist Rob Moose (Bon Iver, Antony and the Johnsons) and trumpet player CJ Camerieri (Sufjan Stevens, American Composers Orchestra).

112 Suzhou Kun Troupe
A collection of scenes from Kunqu, the Classical Opera of Globalized China.
In 2001, UNESCO declared kunqu, the 600-year-old grand opera of China, a “Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.” The declaration not only affirms the artistic and cultural distinctions of the genre, which is known for its perfect blending of dramatic literature, soulful singing, and elegant dancing, but also creates a context for its revival in contemporary and globalized China. The genre is now enjoying a revival, attracting audiences inside and outside China with performances that judiciously blend classical stories and performance practices with contemporary staging interpretations and technologies. Kunqu is recognized internationally for being both authentic and yet fresh and updated. In its own way, it is similar to the Royal Shakespeare Company’s fresh, yet authentic, interpretations of classical English plays.
To experience kunqu is to encounter artistic and classical China interpreted for the globalized present.
To experience kunqu is to see Chinese characters/roles, historical and contemporary, come alive on stage, revealing their Chinese emotions and values.

113 Ensemble Basiani
Ensemble Basiani was created in 2000 with the blessing of Ilia II - Catholicos Patriarch of All Georgia.
UMS is pleased to introduce to Michigan audiences the highly praised all-male choral/folk music ensemble, Basiani, from the Republic of Georgia. The extraordinary program performed by Basiani is representative of Georgia’s musical heritage and comprises samples from almost every geographical region of the Republic. It is an exceptional, highly memorable performance that embraces the range and variety of Georgian folk culture and its distinctive, highly developed forms of polyphony – a central aspect of the cultural legacy that led to UNESCO’s designation in 2001 of Georgian folklore as a masterpiece of the spiritual treasury of the world’s “non-material” culture (which includes folk traditions as a bearer of cultural heritage). Basiani’s members are young singers from various parts of Georgia; most come from families of traditional singers.
Commenting on their 2010 appearance at Lincoln Center as part of a Mostly Mozart program, James Oestreich wrote in The New York Times that Basiani’s performance of “Georgian polyphony descended from an ancient tradition… stole the main show [at Alice Tully Hall]…. The ensemble, singing in close harmony, presented sacred and folk music displaying polyphonic devices ranging from simple drones to intricately interwoven melodies, which often crossed or combined to produce harmonies pungent to the Western ear.” UMS looks forward to sharing the vocal mastery of this magnificent musical ensemble in a program of discovery and revelation.

114 Jason Moran's Fats W
Pianist Jason Moran, a 2011 MacArthur “Genius” grant winner and Downbeat’s 2011 “Jazz Artist of the Year,” is jazz’s wild card, a probing conceptualist who transforms everything he touches into a bracingly contemporary statement. This lively party devoted to the legendary pianist Fats Waller (1904-1943) includes an open dance floor and copious quantities of fun. Rather than interpreting Waller’s ebulliently swinging songbook directly, Moran and the renowned bassist and vocalist Meshell Ndegeocello break down melodies and riffs, with his band “buil[ding] on those fragments, in rhythms coming out of 1960s-and-beyond dance music: Motown, house, hip-hop.” (The New York Times)

115 Dan Zanes and Friend
Dan Zanes & Friends are releasing Little Nut Tree, the group’s first album in five years — and Ann Arbor is celebrating, with two performances by the wild, crazy, and popular ensemble that has “charged to the rescue of beleaguered parents everywhere.” (The Washington Post) Zanes’ live concerts are “a dance party hootenanny for the 21st- century” (Los Angeles Times), appealing to all ages from toddlers to grandparents. Zanes abandoned a pop music career as leader of the Del Fuegos after his daughter was born in 1994. Though she is now 16, he continues to pursue handmade family music full time, with music videos airing on “Sesame Street” and “Playhouse Disney.” Of his first CD, Rocket Ship Beach (2000), The New York Times Magazine said, “Zanes’ kids’ music works because it is not kids’ music; it’s just music — music that’s unsanitized, unpasteurized, that’s organic even.” That assessment certainly hasn’t changed over the past decade; his albums and performances are hip but accessible, bringing a multicultural, musical “mixed bag” approach that has earned Zanes his place at the forefront of the family music movement. “When I started making family music, or 21st- century all-ages social music, I wanted to try and create the updated version of the Folkways records I grew up with,” Zanes says. “They had a homespun mix of old and new songs from a variety of traditions that sounded like they were recorded on someone’s farm… Little Nut Tree is the grooviest of the Dan Zanes & Friends family series CDs — although you could still nap to it if you needed to.”

116 Max Raabe
Dashing, dapper, and debonair, Max Raabe might have walked straight out of the Golden Age of Berlin in the 1920s. With his elegant poise, suave sophistication, and silky-smooth baritone, he brings to life the songs and style of a bygone age. Born into a family of farmers just as the Beatles were serving their apprenticeship in the bars and clubs of Hamburg, Raabe’s childhood musical tastes were formed by his discovery of a weekly program of 1920s music on German radio. His passion was further roused by a record he found in his parent’s cupboard: a humorous instrumental called “I’m Crazy About Hilda.” Before long, he was collecting 78s in flea markets and junk shops, and by age 16 he was an expert on the songs and styles of the Weimar era.
Raabe’s deadpan humor and charmingly meticulous re-creations of the standards as they used to be sung — in formal evening wear with an orchestra — is guaranteed to take the audience away from their everyday problems and into another world. The time has never been better to discover — or rediscover — timeless tunes by legends like Cole Porter, Irving Berlin, and Fred Astaire.

117 NT - Last of the Hau
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in Partnership with the Michigan Theater.
This eagerly-anticipated new play is a funny, touching and sometimes savage portrait of a family that’s losing its grip.
Anarchic, feisty but growing old, high society drop-out Judy Haussman remains in spirit with the Ashrams of the 1960s while holding court in her dilapidated Art Deco house on the Devon coast. After an operation, she’s joined by wayward offspring Nick and Libby, sharp-eyed granddaughter Summer, local doctor Peter, and Daniel, a troubled teenager who makes use of the family’s crumbling swimming pool. Together they share a few sweltering months in this chaotic world of all-day drinking, infatuations, long-held resentments, free love and failure.
Running Time: 3 hours including one 20-minute intermission.

118 NT - Timon of Athens
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Simon Russell Beale takes the title role in Shakespeare’s strange fable of consumption, debt and ruin, written in collaboration with Thomas Middleton.
Wealthy friend to the rich and powerful, patron of the arts, ostentatious host, Timon of Athens is surrounded by free-loaders and sycophants. He vastly outspends his resources but, finding his coffers empty, reassures his loyal steward that all will be well.
When he calls upon his associates, instead of offering help, they hang him out to dry. After a final, vengeful banquet, Timon withdraws to a literal and emotional wasteland, living off roots and pouring curses on a morally bankrupt Athens.

119 NT - Traveling Ligh
A new play by Nicholas Wright
In a remote village in Eastern Europe, around 1900, the young Motl Mendl is entranced by the flickering silent images on his father's cinematograph. Bankrolled by Jacob, the ebullient local timber merchant, and inspired by Anna, the girl sent to help him make moving pictures of their village, he stumbles on a revolutionary way of story-telling. Forty years on, Motl - now a famed American film director - looks back on his early life and confronts the cost of fulfilling his dreams.
Following Vincent in Brixton and The Reporter, Nicholas Wright's new play is a funny and fascinating tribute to the Eastern European immigrants who became major players in Hollywood's golden age. The award- winning Antony Sher - whose previous work with the National Theatre includes Primo and Stanley - returns to play Jacob.

120 Colin Stetson
Born and raised in Ann Arbor, saxophonist Colin Stetson has spent the 15 years since he graduated from the University of Michigan working with dozens of artists, including Tom Waits, Feist, Laurie Anderson, Lou Reed, David Byrne, LCD Soundsystem, and Angélique Kidjo, among others. He is a current member of the indie band Bon Iver yet has developed an utterly unique voice as a soloist (principally on saxophones and clarinets). His intense technical prowess is matched by his emotionally gripping skills as a songwriter. “Stetson demolishes clichés to unleash fresh, unexpected energies. It’s like being inside an enormous brass tunnel full of windy byways and slamming valves, at once exhilarating and frightening.” (Pitchfork)

121 Fred Hersch Trio
Proclaimed by Vanity Fair as “the most arrestingly innovative pianist in jazz over the last decade,” Fred Hersch balances his internationally recognized instrumental and improvisational skills with significant achievements as a composer, bandleader, and theatrical conceptualist. Hersch has fully lived up to the approbation of The New York Times, which praised him as “singular among the trailblazers of their art, a largely unsung innovator of this borderless, individualistic jazz — a jazz for the 21st century.”

122 One Night in Bamako
In the midst of a military coup that has brought terrible unrest to Mali, two of the country’s talents unite for a special concert. Bassekou Kouyaté is a virtuoso picker, musical visionary, and one of Africa’s greatest instrumentalists, whose work blurs the lines between West African and American roots music. His instrument, the ngoni, is an ancestor of the banjo and the key instrument of griot storytelling culture. Perpetuating Mali’s rich musical tradition, Fatoumata Diawara presents a joyous mix of the vibrant and understated, combining songs about love, politics, and empowerment. Inspired by Wassoulou tradition, jazz, and blues, she has created her own unique contemporary folk sound with a distinctly African spin, with arresting melodies soaring over intricate guitar and drum arrangements.

123 Alfredo Rodriguez &
A young pianist of astonishing virtuosity and imagination, Cuban-born Alfredo Rodríguez performs with the open spirit of a culture rooted in dancing. Especially evident during his live performances, Rodríguez imparts a youthful, riveting artistry that fuses Latin music and jazz in surprising and beautiful ways. Quincy Jones discovered his unique talent at the Montreux Jazz Festival in 2006, and his performances have evoked comparisons of legendary jazz pianists like Keith Jarrett, Thelonious Monk, and Bill Evans. This double-bill performance also features percussionist and vocalist Pedrito Martinez, who incorporates the folklore of his Cuban roots with religious Yoruba chants and batá melodies into the traditional clave beat of popular Latin jazz. His popularity extends to the musical scene of New York streets, where his devotion to live performance establishes itself at the restaurant Guantanamera, where he plays three times a week.

124 Beijing Guitar Duo
Meng Su and Yameng Wang are widely noted for their outstanding technique and artistic musicality. They first met as children at the Central Conservatory in Beijing, where they studied with the acclaimed professor Chen Zhi. Both women have won the Tokyo International Guitar Competition (Yameng Wang won it at age 12), and have received heaps of acclaim and recognition at international guitar events and from other seasoned guitarists, including Sergio Assad who has written and dedicated works to them. In 2008, they went to study with Manuel Barrueco at the Peabody Conservatory of Music in Baltimore and officially established themselves as the Beijing Guitar Duo. Their impressive talents come together to create one of the most exciting guitar duos on the scene today. Manuel Barrueco joins them for this debut performance, which will feature both individual and ensemble work for classical guitar. “It was clear from the evening that both women are incredibly gifted, and together, with their ability to fuse technical skill effortlessly with their depth of musicality, they have the star potential to serve as inspiration for new generations of guitarists to come.” (Classical Guitar)

125 NT - One Man, Two Gu
Based on Goldoni’s The Servant of Two Masters (which UMS presented in the 05/06 season with Piccolo Teatro di Milano), Richard Bean’s One Man, Two Guvnors is directed by National Theatre artistic director Nicholas Hytner. Starring James Corden, this entertaining comedy is set in 1963 Brighton (UK), with sex, food, and money high on the agenda. Early reviews in London hailed it as “one of the funniest productions in the National’s history” (Daily Telegraph) and “the feel-good hit of the summer.” (The Telegraph) This production has already sold out every performance through September in London.

126 NT - Frankenstein
For the third year, UMS and the Michigan Theater bring these high-definition screenings of live theater broadcasts by the National Theatre, London. The broadcasts feature plays produced by the National Theatre on cinema screens worldwide. In the US, the “live” screenings are delayed to accommodate the time difference. Broadcasts feature behind-the-scenes footage and interviews with actors.
A new play by Nick Dear based on the novel by Mary Shelley.
Oscar-winner Danny Boyle (127 Hours, Slumdog Millionaire) returned to the theatre to direct this visionary production with Benedict Cumberbatch and Jonny Lee Miller. It will return to cinemas worldwide from June for a limited season of encore screenings. Benedict Cumberbatch and Jonny Lee Miller alternate the roles of Victor Frankenstein and the Creature in two electrifying broadcasts.
Childlike in his innocence but grotesque in form, Frankenstein's bewildered creature is cast out into a hostile universe by his horror-struck maker. Meeting with cruelty wherever he goes, the friendless Creature, increasingly desperate and vengeful, determines to track down his creator and strike a terrifying deal.
Urgent concerns of scientific responsibility, parental neglect, cognitive development and the nature of good and evil are embedded within this thrilling and deeply disturbing classic gothic tale.
Wednesday, June 6 - Jonny Lee Miller as The Creature and Benedict Cumberbatch as Victor Frankenstein
Thursday, June 7 - Benedict Cumberbatch as The Creature and Jonny Lee Miller as Victor Frankenstein

127 NT - The Kitchen
In the kitchen of an enormous West End restaurant in 1950s London, the orders are piling up: a post-war feast of soup, fish, cutlets, omelets, and fruit flans. Thrown together by their work, chefs, waitresses, and porters from across Europe — English, Irish, German, Jewish — argue and flirt as they race to keep up. Peter, a high-spirited young cook, seems to thrive on the pressure. In between preparing dishes, he manages to strike up an affair with a married waitress while dreaming of a better life. But in the all-consuming clamor of the kitchen, nothing is far from the brink of collapse. Arnold Wesker’s extraordinary play premiered at the Royal Court in 1959. It features an ensemble of 30 people and is set in a kitchen, using real food and actors actually cooking and preparing food on stage. This tour-de-force spectacle is a blackly funny and furious examination of life lived at breakneck speed, when work threatens to define who we are.

128 NT - The Comedy of E
Dominic Cooke, director of the Royal Court Theatre in London, comes to the National for the first time to direct Shakespeare’s The Comedy of Errors. UK comedian and actor Lenny Henry makes his National Theatre debut as Antipholus of Syracuse.

129 Mavericks All Access
As part of its centennial season, Michael Tilson Thomas and the San Francisco Symphony will present its second American Mavericks Festival, which will tour in its entirety to only two US venues: Hill Auditorium and Carnegie Hall. The 2012 festival celebrates the creative pioneering spirit and the composers who created a new American musical voice for the 20th century and beyond. These concerts will examine the music of iconoclastic, revolutionary composers championed by MTT and the SFS, such as John Cage, Morton Feldman, Carl Ruggles, Edgard Varèse, and Charles Ives, and expand the maverick roster through commissions by Bay Area composers John Adams and Mason Bates. Concerts will feature performances by longtime SFS collaborators Jessye Norman, Emanuel Ax, Meredith Monk, Jeremy Denk, and the St. Lawrence String Quartet, among others.
This final concert of the four-concert American Mavericks residency features 17 musicians from the San Francisco Symphony performing chamber music. American mavericks explored every sound that a full orchestra could make, but they also composed fascinating, and invigorating, chamber music. This concert features intriguing chamber works from composers whose music will shape the decades to come.

130 NT - People
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
A new play by Alan Bennett
Nicholas Hytner, director
Award-winning writer Alan Bennett is reunited with director Nicholas Hytner and Olivier Award-winning actress Frances de la Tour, with whom he worked on The History Boysand The Habit of Art.
People spoil things; there are so many of them and the last thing one wants is them traipsing through one’s house. But with the park a jungle and a bath on the billiard table, what is one to do? Dorothy (Frances de la Tour) wonders if an attic sale could be a solution.

131 NT - This House
High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
A new play by James Graham
Jeremy Herrin, director
It’s 1974 and the corridors of Westminster ring with the sound of infighting and backbiting as Britain’s political parties battle to change the future of the nation, whatever it takes. In this hung parliament, the ruling party holds on by a thread. Votes are won and lost by one, fist fights erupt in the bars, and ill MPs are hauled in to cast their votes. James Graham’s biting and energetic new play strips politics down to the practical realities of those behind the scenes who roll up their sleeves, on occasion bending the rules, to maneuver a diverse and conflicting chorus of MPs within the Mother of all Parliaments.

132 NT - The Curious Inc
High-Definition Broadcasts from the National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater.
Mark Haddon’s celebrated, multi-award-winning novel is beautifully and imaginatively adapted into a stage play for the first time.
Christopher, fifteen years old, stands beside Mrs Shears’ dead dog, Wellington. It has been speared with a garden fork, it is seven minutes after midnight and Christopher is under suspicion. He records each fact in his book to solve the mystery. He has an extraordinary brain, exceptional at maths but ill-equipped to interpret everyday life. He has never ventured alone beyond the end of his road, he detests being touched and he distrusts strangers. But his detective work, forbidden by his father, takes him on a frightening journey that upturns his world.
Running Time: 2 ½ hours including one 20-minute intermission.

133 NT - Coriolanus
"High-Definition Broadcasts from National Theatre, London. Presented in partnership with the Michigan Theater. National Theatre Live will broadcast the Donmar Warehouse’s production of Coriolanus, Shakespeare’s searing tragedy of political manipulation and revenge. When an old adversary threatens Rome, the city calls once more on her hero and defender: Coriolanus. But he has enemies at home, too. Famine threatens the city, the citizens’ hunger swells to an appetite for change, and on returning from the field Coriolanus must confront the march of realpolitik and the voice of an angry people."
Discounted tickets for UMS Subscribers and Donors as well as Michigan Theater Members are available. Please call 734-764-2538 to purchase your tickets and receive that benefit.

134 Steve Lehman Octet
Steve Lehman is a “quietly dazzling saxophonist” (The New York Times) who works across a broad spectrum of experimental musical idioms. His pieces have been performed by the International Contemporary Ensemble and So Percussion, among others, and his 2009 recording Travail, Transformation & Flow was chosen as the “#1 Jazz/Pop Album of the Year” by The New York Times. This visionary composer is creating powerful new models for improvisation and leads his Octet in this UMS debut.

135 Asif Ali Khan
If the late, great Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan (1948-97) was known as “the emperor of Qawwali,” Asif Ali Khan — who was once hailed by the maestro as one of his best students — has surely emerged as the music’s reigning prince. Asif is a superstar in his native Pakistan and a powerful figure on the international stage, remaining faithful to the sublime traditions of devotional Sufi music. His music can be meditative and trance-inducing, before, at a turn, becoming thrilling and ecstatic. To hear his voice soaring above the call-and-response choruses, rhythmic hand claps, percussion, and harmonium of his accompanying musicians is an inspiring experience whether you’re an adherent of the Sufi faith or not.

136 DC: Hubbard
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago returns for a one-night-only program featuring choreography by William Forsythe. Raised in New York, Forsythe had a 20-year tenure as director of Ballett Frankfurt before starting his own company in Germany. He is one of the choreographers who changed ballet from its identification with 19th-century classical repertoire to a more dynamic, 21st-century art form. The program will include Quintett, Forsythe’s tribute to his wife, who died of cancer at the age of 32; N.N.N.N., a piece for four men; and One Flat Thing, reproduced, inspired by the risk and adventure of Robert Scott’s arctic expeditions, during which explorers relied on each other for survival.One Flat Thing is performed via performed within the confines of a tightly-spaced set of tables, a thrilling sequence of team choreography that runs dangerously close to reckless abandon.
What Makes It Renegade? William Forsythe is a true post-modernist dance maker who has defiantly turned ballet’s orientation away from its 19th-century traditions toward the future by embracing forward-looking aesthetic ideas — dance, voice, text, sound, visual art, and anything else at hand — to create trans-disciplinary works.

137 FAM -Aspen Santa Fe
“Simply breathtaking,” proclaims the Chicago Sun-Times about Aspen Santa Fe Ballet, whose UMS debut features a program of contemporary ballet that exemplifies the company’s commitment to commissioning dance by both world-renowned and emerging choreographers. With a European aesthetic grounded in American sensibilities, this 11-member troupe of classically trained dancers has developed a worldwide following. “Stark, sleek, and chock-full of moves that skirt the edges of contemporary movement.” (The Boston Globe)
Aspen Santa Fe Ballet began in Aspen in 1996, and a partnership four years later led to the creation of a company that splits its time between Aspen and Santa Fe. Artistic director Tom Mossbrucker, a former principal dancer with the Joffrey Ballet, has been with the company since the beginning. He is dedicated to presenting an eclectic repertoire and committed to acquiring new works that persistently challenge, enliven, and education both audiences and the company dancers.

138 James Blake
Twenty-four-year-old James Blake is a classically trained pianist who has quickly ascended to become a leading figure in the dubstep electronic dance music community. His unique creative output blends soul influences, gospel harmonies, and folk traditions with deep, club-like, heavy bass. Blake’s self-titled debut LP, James Blake, was awarded “Best New Music” and was ranked as the 12th best album of 2011 on Pitchfork Media’s year-end list. For his UMS performance at Michigan Theater, Blake will perform music from his critically acclaimed 2013 album Overgrown.

139 Breakin' Curfew
Ann Arbor area youth raise the curtain of the Power Center to offer a rare glimpse into the performance art they create in their basements, garages, and schools, and at Ann Arbor's teen center, the Neutral Zone. Curated, produced, and marketed by local high school students, this annual event allows entrance into the lively and innovoative minds of talented young performers. The ultimate reflection of the extraordinary artistic variety that thrives in our teen community, Breakin' Curfew blends spoken word, dance, rock-and-roll, hip-hop, classical music, jazz, and much more for a single blowout extravaganza of thought-provoking musical, lyrical, and visual art. This truly one-of-a-kind show exists only in Ann Arbor, and is a paramount exhibition of southeast Michigan's most diverse teen talent.
NOTE: Student tickets are available for purchase by phone at 734-764-2538 or by visiting the Michigan League Ticket Office.

140 Fela!
His story inspired a nation. His music inspires the world. FELA! tells the true story of the legendary Nigerian musician Fela Kuti, whose soulful Afrobeat rhythms ignited a generation. Motivated by his mother, a civil rights champion, he defied a corrupt and oppressive military government and devoted his life and music to the struggle for freedom and human dignity. FELA! is a triumphant tale of courage, passion, and love, featuring Fela Kuti’s captivating music and the visionary direction and choreography of Tony Award-winner Bill T. Jones. UMS is delighted to work in partnership with Music Hall in Detroit to bring the Tony Awardwinning, critically acclaimed musical FELA! to UMS audiences. The production had a successful 18-month run on Broadway and is currently in an open-ended run in London, with a multi-city American tour in 2012. For one performance in this three-week Detroit run, Music Hall is offering UMS audiences the very best seats on the main floor and in the mezzanine. UMS is arranging luxury coach transportation for an additional $10 per person from a location in Ann Arbor to Detroit. To order, call the UMS Ticket Office at 734-763-3100 or visit www.ums.org. UMS subscribers and donors may order by phone, in person, or online now; all other seats are available for purchase beginning Saturday, October 1, 2011. Please Note: UMS Is only holding tickets for the Sunday, February 19 matinee; all other performances will be available through Music Hall beginning October 1.

141 DC: Ballet Preljocaj
Few audience members in attendance at Ballet Preljocaj’s 2012 performances of Snow White will forget the company’s astonishing creativity and extraordinary dancing. And Then, One Thousand Years of Peace, which will be seen only at UMS and at BAM, was first created by Angelin Preljocaj for the Bolshoi Ballet in 2010 and takes inspiration from the vision of apocalypse conjured by St. John in the biblical Book of Revelation. It is, he says, about the lifting (“apo”) of the veil (“calypsis”) of things in our world that are hidden from view, rather than a depiction of biblical or global catastrophe. Set to a pulsating soundtrack, the piece combines intricate, edgy action with slow, graceful movement in an ever-evolving dance that reveals our innermost hopes, desires, and fears. “A huge, ambitious monolith of a work.” (The Guardian)
New this season! As part of our focus on dance in 2013-2014, a small set of tweet seats will be available at each dance performance, including the Friday, November 1 performance of Ballet Preljocaj. Tweet seats are seats in which tweeting about the performance is permitted during the event. Interested in trying out a tweet seat? Call the UMS Ticket Office at 734.764.2538 or visit the Michigan League ticket office to order.

142 Diego - post perf
“Flamenco has to be suffered,” Diego El Cigala asserted in a New York Times interview. “How do you convey emotions from within your heart if you don’t know what suffering is? If there is no evidence of pain in your heart, there is no song.” Nicknamed “El Cigala” (Norway Lobster) for his thin frame and strong voice, Diego is an internationally celebrated Gitano flamenco singer and contemporary flamenco’s most compelling voice. His mother and father were both accomplished practitioners of flamenco, as were his grandparents. He started off singing for well-known flamenco dancers but has since “moved to the front,” which in flamenco slang means to sing on one’s own instead of accompanying a dancer. He is noted for being a pioneer in fusing flamenco with other Latin American music forms such as the bolero, Afro-Caribbean jazz, and tango. His latest project, Cigala & Tango, is the musical testimony to his concert at the legendary Teatro Gran Rex in Buenos Aires last April. The legendary Paco de Lucía says, “Diego has one of the most beautiful flamenco voices of our time, a voice of sweetness that flows over everything. When I listen to him, it warms my heart.” The New York Times adds, “He radiates a magnetic mix of winking charm and unpredictable vitriol reminiscent of a singer from an entirely different milieu, Frank Sinatra.”

143 Usher party
